EUCLID’S ELEMENTS OF GEOMETRY
The Greek text of J.L. Heiberg (1883–1885)
from Euclidis Elementa, edidit et Latine interpretatus est I.L. Heiberg, in aedibus
B.G. Teubneri, 1883–1885
edited, and provided with a modern English translation, by
Richard Fitzpatrick
First edition - 2007
Revised and corrected - 2008
ISBN 978-0-6151-7984-1
Contents
Introduction 4
Book 1 5
Book 2 49
Book 3 69
Book 4 109
Book 5 129
Book 6 155
Book 7 193
Book 8 227

Greek-English Lexicon 539
Introduction
Euclid’s Elements is by far the most famous mathematical work of classical antiquity, and also has the distinction
of being the world’s oldest continuously used mathematical textbook. Little is known about the author, beyond
the fact that he lived in Alexandria around 300 BCE. The main subjects of the work are geometry, proportion, and
number theory.
Most of the theorems appearing in the Elements were not discovered by Euclid himself, but were the work of
earlier Greek mathematicians such as Pythagoras (and his school), Hippocrates of Chios, Theaetetus of Athens, and
Eudoxus of Cnidos. However, Euclid is generally credited with arranging these theorems in a logical manner, so as to
demonstrate (admittedly, not always with the rigour demanded by modern mathematics) that they necessarily follow
from five simple axioms. Euclid is also credited with devising a number of particularly ingenious proofs of previously
discovered theorems: e.g., Theorem 48 in Book 1.
The geometrical constructions employed in the Elements are restricted to those which can be achieved using a
straight-rule and a compass. Furthermore, empirical proofs by means of measurement are strictly forbidden: i.e.,
any comparison of two magnitudes is restricted to saying that the magnitudes are either equal, or that one is greater
than the other.
The Elements consists of thirteen books. Book 1 outlines the fundamental propositions of plane geometry, including the three cases in which triangles are congruent, various theorems involving parallel lines, the theorem regarding
the sum of the angles in a triangle, and the Pythagorean theorem. Book 2 is commonly said to deal with “geometric
algebra”, since most of the theorems contained within it have simple algebraic interpretations. Book 3 investigates
circles and their properties, and includes theorems on tangents and inscribed angles. Book 4 is concerned with regular polygons inscribed in, and circumscribed around, circles. Book 5 develops the arithmetic theory of proportion.
Book 6 applies the theory of proportion to plane geometry, and contains theorems on similar figures. Book 7 deals
with elementary number theory: e.g., prime numbers, greatest common denominators, etc. Book 8 is concerned with
geometric series. Book 9 contains various applications of results in the previous two books, and includes theorems
on the infinitude of prime numbers, as well as the sum of a geometric series. Book 10 attempts to classify incommensurable (i.e., irrational) magnitudes using the so-called “method of exhaustion”, an ancient precursor to integration.
Book 11 deals with the fundamental propositions of three-dimensional geometry. Book 12 calculates the relative
volumes of cones, pyramids, cylinders, and spheres using the method of exhaustion. Finally, Book 13 investigates the
five so-called Platonic solids.
This edition of Euclid’s Elements presents the definitive Greek text—i.e., that edited by J.L. Heiberg (1883–
1885)—accompanied by a modern English translation, as well as a Greek-English lexicon. Neither the spurious
books 14 and 15, nor the extensive scholia which have been added to the Elements over the centuries, are included.
The aim of the translation is to make the mathematical argument as clear and unambiguous as possible, whilst still
adhering closely to the meaning of the original Greek. Text within square parenthesis (in both Greek and English)
indicates material identified by Heiberg as being later interpolations to the original text (some particularly obvious or
unhelpful interpolations have been omitted altogether). Text within round parenthesis (in English) indicates material
which is implied, but not actually present, in the Greek text.
My thanks to Mariusz Wodzicki (Berkeley) for typesetting advice, and to Sam Watson & Jonathan Fenno (U.
Mississippi), and Gregory Wong (UCSD) for pointing out a number of errors in Book 1.
4
ELEMENTS BOOK 1
Fundamentals of Plane Geometry Involving
Straight-Lines
5
STOIQEIWN aþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 1
VOroi. Definitions
αʹ. Σημεῖόν ἐστιν, οὗ μέρος οὐθέν. 1. A point is that of which there is no part.
βʹ. Γραμμὴ δὲ μῆκος ἀπλατές. 2. And a line is a length without breadth.
γʹ. Γραμμῆς δὲ πέρατα σημεῖα. 3. And the extremities of a line are points.
δʹ. Εὐθεῖα γραμμή ἐστιν, ἥτις ἐξ ἴσου τοῖς ἐφ᾿ ἑαυτῆς 4. A straight-line is (any) one which lies evenly with
σημείοις κεῖται. points on itself.
εʹ. ᾿Επιφάνεια δέ ἐστιν, ὃ μῆκος καὶ πλάτος μόνον ἔχει. 5. And a surface is that which has length and breadth
ϛʹ. ᾿Επιφανείας δὲ πέρατα γραμμαί. only.
ζʹ. ᾿Επίπεδος ἐπιφάνειά ἐστιν, ἥτις ἐξ ἴσου ταῖς ἐφ᾿ 6. And the extremities of a surface are lines.
ἑαυτῆς εὐθείαις κεῖται. 7. A plane surface is (any) one which lies evenly with
ηʹ. ᾿Επίπεδος δὲ γωνία ἐστὶν ἡ ἐν ἐπιπέδῳ δύο γραμμῶν the straight-lines on itself.
ἁπτομένων ἀλλήλων καὶ μὴ ἐπ᾿ εὐθείας κειμένων πρὸς 8. And a plane angle is the inclination of the lines to
ἀλλήλας τῶν γραμμῶν κλίσις. one another, when two lines in a plane meet one another,
θʹ. ῞Οταν δὲ αἱ περιέχουσαι τὴν γωνίαν γραμμαὶ εὐθεῖαι and are not lying in a straight-line.
ὦσιν, εὐθύγραμμος καλεῖται ἡ γωνία. 9. And when the lines containing the angle are
ιʹ. ῞Οταν δὲ εὐθεῖα ἐπ᾿ εὐθεῖαν σταθεῖσα τὰς ἐφεξῆς straight then the angle is called rectilinear.
γωνίας ἴσας ἀλλήλαις ποιῇ, ὀρθὴ ἑκατέρα τῶν ἴσων γωνιῶν 10. And when a straight-line stood upon (another)
ἐστι, καὶ ἡ ἐφεστηκυῖα εὐθεῖα κάθετος καλεῖται, ἐφ᾿ ἣν straight-line makes adjacent angles (which are) equal to
ἐφέστηκεν. one another, each of the equal angles is a right-angle, and
ιαʹ. ᾿Αμβλεῖα γωνία ἐστὶν ἡ μείζων ὀρθῆς. the former straight-line is called a perpendicular to that
ιβʹ. ᾿Οξεῖα δὲ ἡ ἐλάσσων ὀρθῆς. upon which it stands.
ιγʹ. ῞Ορος ἐστίν, ὅ τινός ἐστι πέρας. 11. An obtuse angle is one greater than a right-angle.
ιδʹ. Σχῆμά ἐστι τὸ ὑπό τινος ἤ τινων ὅρων περιεχόμενον. 12. And an acute angle (is) one less than a right-angle.
ιεʹ. Κύκλος ἐστὶ σχῆμα ἐπίπεδον ὑπὸ μιᾶς γραμμῆς 13. A boundary is that which is the extremity of someπεριεχόμενον [ἣ καλεῖται περιφέρεια], πρὸς ἣν ἀφ᾿ ἑνὸς thing.
σημείου τῶν ἐντὸς τοῦ σχήματος κειμένων πᾶσαι αἱ 14. A figure is that which is contained by some boundπροσπίπτουσαι εὐθεῖαι [πρὸς τὴν τοῦ κύκλου περιφέρειαν] ary or boundaries.
ἴσαι ἀλλήλαις εἰσίν. 15. A circle is a plane figure contained by a single line
ιϛʹ. Κέντρον δὲ τοῦ κύκλου τὸ σημεῖον καλεῖται. [which is called a circumference], (such that) all of the
ιζʹ. Διάμετρος δὲ τοῦ κύκλου ἐστὶν εὐθεῖά τις διὰ τοῦ straight-lines radiating towards [the circumference] from
κέντρου ἠγμένη καὶ περατουμένη ἐφ᾿ ἑκάτερα τὰ μέρη one point amongst those lying inside the figure are equal
ὑπὸ τῆς τοῦ κύκλου περιφερείας, ἥτις καὶ δίχα τέμνει τὸν to one another.
κύκλον. 16. And the point is called the center of the circle.
ιηʹ. ῾Ημικύκλιον δέ ἐστι τὸ περιεχόμενον σχῆμα ὑπό τε 17. And a diameter of the circle is any straight-line,
τῆς διαμέτρου καὶ τῆς ἀπολαμβανομένης ὑπ᾿ αὐτῆς περι- being drawn through the center, and terminated in each
φερείας. κέντρον δὲ τοῦ ἡμικυκλίου τὸ αὐτό, ὃ καὶ τοῦ direction by the circumference of the circle. (And) any
κύκλου ἐστίν. such (straight-line) also cuts the circle in half.†
ιθʹ. Σχήματα εὐθύγραμμά ἐστι τὰ ὑπὸ εὐθειῶν πε- 18. And a semi-circle is the figure contained by the
ριεχόμενα, τρίπλευρα μὲν τὰ ὑπὸ τριῶν, τετράπλευρα δὲ τὰ diameter and the circumference cuts off by it. And the
ὑπὸ τεσσάρων, πολύπλευρα δὲ τὰ ὑπὸ πλειόνων ἢ τεσσάρων center of the semi-circle is the same (point) as (the center
εὐθειῶν περιεχόμενα. of) the circle.
κʹ. Τῶν δὲ τριπλεύρων σχημάτων ἰσόπλευρον μὲν 19. Rectilinear figures are those (figures) contained
τρίγωνόν ἐστι τὸ τὰς τρεῖς ἴσας ἔχον πλευράς, ἰσοσκελὲς by straight-lines: trilateral figures being those contained
δὲ τὸ τὰς δύο μόνας ἴσας ἔχον πλευράς, σκαληνὸν δὲ τὸ by three straight-lines, quadrilateral by four, and multiτὰς τρεῖς ἀνίσους ἔχον πλευράς. lateral by more than four.
καʹ ῎Ετι δὲ τῶν τριπλεύρων σχημάτων ὀρθογώνιον μὲν 20. And of the trilateral figures: an equilateral trianτρίγωνόν ἐστι τὸ ἔχον ὀρθὴν γωνίαν, ἀμβλυγώνιον δὲ τὸ gle is that having three equal sides, an isosceles (triangle)
ἔχον ἀμβλεῖαν γωνίαν, ὀξυγώνιον δὲ τὸ τὰς τρεῖς ὀξείας that having only two equal sides, and a scalene (triangle)
ἔχον γωνίας. that having three unequal sides.
6
STOIQEIWN aþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 1
κβʹ. Τὼν δὲ τετραπλεύρων σχημάτων τετράγωνον μέν 21. And further of the trilateral figures: a right-angled
ἐστιν, ὃ ἰσόπλευρόν τέ ἐστι καὶ ὀρθογώνιον, ἑτερόμηκες triangle is that having a right-angle, an obtuse-angled
δέ, ὃ ὀρθογώνιον μέν, οὐκ ἰσόπλευρον δέ, ῥόμβος δέ, ὃ (triangle) that having an obtuse angle, and an acuteἰσόπλευρον μέν, οὐκ ὀρθογώνιον δέ, ῥομβοειδὲς δὲ τὸ τὰς angled (triangle) that having three acute angles.
ἀπεναντίον πλευράς τε καὶ γωνίας ἴσας ἀλλήλαις ἔχον, ὃ 22. And of the quadrilateral figures: a square is that
οὔτε ἰσόπλευρόν ἐστιν οὔτε ὀρθογώνιον· τὰ δὲ παρὰ ταῦτα which is right-angled and equilateral, a rectangle that
τετράπλευρα τραπέζια καλείσθω. which is right-angled but not equilateral, a rhombus that
κγʹ. Παράλληλοί εἰσιν εὐθεῖαι, αἵτινες ἐν τῷ αὐτῷ which is equilateral but not right-angled, and a rhomboid
ἐπιπέδῳ οὖσαι καὶ ἐκβαλλόμεναι εἰς ἄπειρον ἐφ᾿ ἑκάτερα that having opposite sides and angles equal to one anτὰ μέρη ἐπὶ μηδέτερα συμπίπτουσιν ἀλλήλαις. other which is neither right-angled nor equilateral. And
let quadrilateral figures besides these be called trapezia.
23. Parallel lines are straight-lines which, being in the
same plane, and being produced to infinity in each direction, meet with one another in neither (of these directions).
† This should really be counted as a postulate, rather than as part of a definition.
AÊt mata. Postulates
αʹ. ᾿Ηιτήσθω ἀπὸ παντὸς σημείου ἐπὶ πᾶν σημεῖον 1. Let it have been postulated†
to draw a straight-line
εὐθεῖαν γραμμὴν ἀγαγεῖν. from any point to any point.
βʹ. Καὶ πεπερασμένην εὐθεῖαν κατὰ τὸ συνεχὲς ἐπ᾿ 2. And to produce a finite straight-line continuously
εὐθείας ἐκβαλεῖν. in a straight-line.
γʹ. Καὶ παντὶ κέντρῳ καὶ διαστήματι κύκλον γράφεσθαι. 3. And to draw a circle with any center and radius.
δʹ. Καὶ πάσας τὰς ὀρθὰς γωνίας ἴσας ἀλλήλαις εἶναι. 4. And that all right-angles are equal to one another.
εʹ. Καὶ ἐὰν εἰς δύο εὐθείας εὐθεῖα ἐμπίπτουσα τὰς ἐντὸς 5. And that if a straight-line falling across two (other)
καὶ ἐπὶ τὰ αὐτὰ μέρη γωνίας δύο ὀρθῶν ἐλάσσονας ποιῇ, straight-lines makes internal angles on the same side
ἐκβαλλομένας τὰς δύο εὐθείας ἐπ᾿ ἄπειρον συμπίπτειν, ἐφ᾿ (of itself whose sum is) less than two right-angles, then
ἃ μέρη εἰσὶν αἱ τῶν δύο ὀρθῶν ἐλάσσονες. the two (other) straight-lines, being produced to infinity,
meet on that side (of the original straight-line) that the
(sum of the internal angles) is less than two right-angles
(and do not meet on the other side).‡
† The Greek present perfect tense indicates a past action with present significance. Hence, the 3rd-person present perfect imperative >Hit sjw
could be translated as “let it be postulated”, in the sense “let it stand as postulated”, but not “let the postulate be now brought forward”. The
literal translation “let it have been postulated” sounds awkward in English, but more accurately captures the meaning of the Greek.
‡ This postulate effectively specifies that we are dealing with the geometry of flat, rather than curved, space.
KoinaÈ ênnoiai. Common Notions
αʹ. Τὰ τῷ αὐτῷ ἴσα καὶ ἀλλήλοις ἐστὶν ἴσα. 1. Things equal to the same thing are also equal to
βʹ. Καὶ ἐὰν ἴσοις ἴσα προστεθῇ, τὰ ὅλα ἐστὶν ἴσα. one another.
γʹ. Καὶ ἐὰν ἀπὸ ἴσων ἴσα ἀφαιρεθῇ, τὰ καταλειπόμενά 2. And if equal things are added to equal things then
ἐστιν ἴσα. the wholes are equal.
δʹ. Καὶ τὰ ἐφαρμόζοντα ἐπ᾿ ἀλλήλα ἴσα ἀλλήλοις ἐστίν. 3. And if equal things are subtracted from equal things
εʹ. Καὶ τὸ ὅλον τοῦ μέρους μεῖζόν [ἐστιν]. then the remainders are equal.†
4. And things coinciding with one another are equal
to one another.
5. And the whole [is] greater than the part.
† As an obvious extension of C.N.s 2 & 3—if equal things are added or subtracted from the two sides of an inequality then the inequality remains
7
STOIQEIWN aþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 1
an inequality of the same type.
aþ. Proposition 1
᾿Επὶ τῆς δοθείσης εὐθείας πεπερασμένης τρίγωνον To construct an equilateral triangle on a given finite
ἰσόπλευρον συστήσασθαι. straight-line.
∆ Α
Γ
Β Ε D A E B
C
῎Εστω ἡ δοθεῖσα εὐθεῖα πεπερασμένη ἡ ΑΒ. Let AB be the given finite straight-line.
Δεῖ δὴ ἐπὶ τῆς ΑΒ εὐθείας τρίγωνον ἰσόπλευρον So it is required to construct an equilateral triangle on
συστήσασθαι. the straight-line AB.
Κέντρῳ μὲν τῷ Α διαστήματι δὲ τῷ ΑΒ κύκλος Let the circle BCD with center A and radius AB have
γεγράφθω ὁ ΒΓΔ, καὶ πάλιν κέντρῳ μὲν τῷ Β διαστήματι δὲ been drawn [Post. 3], and again let the circle ACE with
τῷ ΒΑ κύκλος γεγράφθω ὁ ΑΓΕ, καὶ ἀπὸ τοῦ Γ σημείου, center B and radius BA have been drawn [Post. 3]. And
καθ᾿ ὃ τέμνουσιν ἀλλήλους οἱ κύκλοι, ἐπί τὰ Α, Β σημεῖα let the straight-lines CA and CB have been joined from
ἐπεζεύχθωσαν εὐθεῖαι αἱ ΓΑ, ΓΒ. the point C, where the circles cut one another,†
to the
Καὶ ἐπεὶ τὸ Α σημεῖον κέντρον ἐστὶ τοῦ ΓΔΒ κύκλου, points A and B (respectively) [Post. 1].
ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ΑΓ τῇ ΑΒ· πάλιν, ἐπεὶ τὸ Β σημεῖον κέντρον And since the point A is the center of the circle CDB,
ἐστὶ τοῦ ΓΑΕ κύκλου, ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ΒΓ τῇ ΒΑ. ἐδείχθη δὲ AC is equal to AB [Def. 1.15]. Again, since the point
καὶ ἡ ΓΑ τῇ ΑΒ ἴση· ἑκατέρα ἄρα τῶν ΓΑ, ΓΒ τῇ ΑΒ ἐστιν B is the center of the circle CAE, BC is equal to BA
ἴση. τὰ δὲ τῷ αὐτῷ ἴσα καὶ ἀλλήλοις ἐστὶν ἴσα· καὶ ἡ ΓΑ ἄρα [Def. 1.15]. But CA was also shown (to be) equal to AB.
τῇ ΓΒ ἐστιν ἴση· αἱ τρεῖς ἄρα αἱ ΓΑ, ΑΒ, ΒΓ ἴσαι ἀλλήλαις Thus, CA and CB are each equal to AB. But things equal
εἰσίν. to the same thing are also equal to one another [C.N. 1].
᾿Ισόπλευρον ἄρα ἐστὶ τὸ ΑΒΓ τρίγωνον. καὶ συνέσταται Thus, CA is also equal to CB. Thus, the three (straightἐπὶ τῆς δοθείσης εὐθείας πεπερασμένης τῆς ΑΒ. ὅπερ ἔδει lines) CA, AB, and BC are equal to one another.
ποιῆσαι. Thus, the triangle ABC is equilateral, and has been
constructed on the given finite straight-line AB. (Which
is) the very thing it was required to do.
† The assumption that the circles do indeed cut one another should be counted as an additional postulate. There is also an implicit assumption
that two straight-lines cannot share a common segment.
bþ. Proposition 2†
Πρὸς τῷ δοθέντι σημείῳ τῇ δοθείσῃ εὐθείᾳ ἴσην εὐθεῖαν To place a straight-line equal to a given straight-line
θέσθαι. at a given point (as an extremity).
῎Εστω τὸ μὲν δοθὲν σημεῖον τὸ Α, ἡ δὲ δοθεῖσα εὐθεῖα Let A be the given point, and BC the given straightἡ ΒΓ· δεῖ δὴ πρὸς τῷ Α σημείῳ τῇ δοθείσῃ εὐθείᾳ τῇ ΒΓ line. So it is required to place a straight-line at point A
ἴσην εὐθεῖαν θέσθαι. equal to the given straight-line BC.
᾿Επεζεύχθω γὰρ ἀπὸ τοῦ Α σημείου ἐπί τὸ Β σημεῖον For let the straight-line AB have been joined from
εὐθεῖα ἡ ΑΒ, καὶ συνεστάτω ἐπ᾿ αὐτῆς τρίγωνον ἰσόπλευρον point A to point B [Post. 1], and let the equilateral trianτὸ ΔΑΒ, καὶ ἐκβεβλήσθωσαν ἐπ᾿ εὐθείας ταῖς ΔΑ, ΔΒ gle DAB have been been constructed upon it [Prop. 1.1].
8
STOIQEIWN aþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 1
εὐθεῖαι αἱ ΑΕ, ΒΖ, καὶ κέντρῳ μὲν τῷ Β διαστήματι δὲ τῷ And let the straight-lines AE and BF have been proΒΓ κύκλος γεγράφθω ὁ ΓΗΘ, καὶ πάλιν κέντρῳ τῷ Δ καὶ duced in a straight-line with DA and DB (respectively)
διαστήματι τῷ ΔΗ κύκλος γεγράφθω ὁ ΗΚΛ. [Post. 2]. And let the circle CGH with center B and radius BC have been drawn [Post. 3], and again let the circle GKL with center D and radius DG have been drawn
[Post. 3].
Θ
Κ
Α
Β
Γ
∆
Η
Ζ
Λ
Ε
L
K
H
C
D
B
A
G
F
E
᾿Επεὶ οὖν τὸ Β σημεῖον κέντρον ἐστὶ τοῦ ΓΗΘ, ἴση ἐστὶν Therefore, since the point B is the center of (the cirἡ ΒΓ τῇ ΒΗ. πάλιν, ἐπεὶ τὸ Δ σημεῖον κέντρον ἐστὶ τοῦ cle) CGH, BC is equal to BG [Def. 1.15]. Again, since
ΗΚΛ κύκλου, ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ΔΛ τῇ ΔΗ, ὧν ἡ ΔΑ τῇ ΔΒ ἴση the point D is the center of the circle GKL, DL is equal
ἐστίν. λοιπὴ ἄρα ἡ ΑΛ λοιπῇ τῇ ΒΗ ἐστιν ἴση. ἐδείχθη δὲ to DG [Def. 1.15]. And within these, DA is equal to DB.
καὶ ἡ ΒΓ τῇ ΒΗ ἴση· ἑκατέρα ἄρα τῶν ΑΛ, ΒΓ τῇ ΒΗ ἐστιν Thus, the remainder AL is equal to the remainder BG
ἴση. τὰ δὲ τῷ αὐτῷ ἴσα καὶ ἀλλήλοις ἐστὶν ἴσα· καὶ ἡ ΑΛ [C.N. 3]. But BC was also shown (to be) equal to BG.
ἄρα τῇ ΒΓ ἐστιν ἴση. Thus, AL and BC are each equal to BG. But things equal
Πρὸς ἄρα τῷ δοθέντι σημείῳ τῷ Α τῇ δοθείσῃ εὐθείᾳ to the same thing are also equal to one another [C.N. 1].
τῇ ΒΓ ἴση εὐθεῖα κεῖται ἡ ΑΛ· ὅπερ ἔδει ποιῆσαι. Thus, AL is also equal to BC.
Thus, the straight-line AL, equal to the given straightline BC, has been placed at the given point A. (Which
is) the very thing it was required to do.
† This proposition admits of a number of different cases, depending on the relative positions of the point A and the line BC. In such situations,
Euclid invariably only considers one particular case—usually, the most difficult—and leaves the remaining cases as exercises for the reader.
gþ. Proposition 3
Δύο δοθεισῶν εὐθειῶν ἀνίσων ἀπὸ τῆς μείζονος τῇ For two given unequal straight-lines, to cut off from
ἐλάσσονι ἴσην εὐθεῖαν ἀφελεῖν. the greater a straight-line equal to the lesser.
῎Εστωσαν αἱ δοθεῖσαι δύο εὐθεῖαι ἄνισοι αἱ ΑΒ, Γ, ὧν Let AB and C be the two given unequal straight-lines,
μείζων ἔστω ἡ ΑΒ· δεῖ δὴ ἀπὸ τῆς μείζονος τῆς ΑΒ τῇ of which let the greater be AB. So it is required to cut off
ἐλάσσονι τῇ Γ ἴσην εὐθεῖαν ἀφελεῖν. a straight-line equal to the lesser C from the greater AB.
Κείσθω πρὸς τῷ Α σημείῳ τῇ Γ εὐθείᾳ ἴση ἡ ΑΔ· καὶ Let the line AD, equal to the straight-line C, have
κέντρῳ μὲν τῷ Α διαστήματι δὲ τῷ ΑΔ κύκλος γεγράφθω been placed at point A [Prop. 1.2]. And let the circle
ὁ ΔΕΖ. DEF have been drawn with center A and radius AD
Καὶ ἐπεὶ τὸ Α σημεῖον κέντρον ἐστὶ τοῦ ΔΕΖ κύκλου, [Post. 3].
9
STOIQEIWN aþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 1
ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ΑΕ τῇ ΑΔ· ἀλλὰ καὶ ἡ Γ τῇ ΑΔ ἐστιν ἴση. And since point A is the center of circle DEF, AE
ἑκατέρα ἄρα τῶν ΑΕ, Γ τῇ ΑΔ ἐστιν ἴση· ὥστε καὶ ἡ ΑΕ is equal to AD [Def. 1.15]. But, C is also equal to AD.
τῇ Γ ἐστιν ἴση. Thus, AE and C are each equal to AD. So AE is also
equal to C [C.N. 1].
∆
Γ
Α
Ε
Β
Ζ
E
D
C
A
F
B
Δύο ἄρα δοθεισῶν εὐθειῶν ἀνίσων τῶν ΑΒ, Γ ἀπὸ τῆς Thus, for two given unequal straight-lines, AB and C,
μείζονος τῆς ΑΒ τῇ ἐλάσσονι τῇ Γ ἴση ἀφῄρηται ἡ ΑΕ· ὅπερ the (straight-line) AE, equal to the lesser C, has been cut
ἔδει ποιῆσαι. off from the greater AB. (Which is) the very thing it was
required to do.
dþ. Proposition 4
᾿Εὰν δύο τρίγωνα τὰς δύο πλευρὰς [ταῖς] δυσὶ πλευραῖς If two triangles have two sides equal to two sides, reἴσας ἔχῃ ἑκατέραν ἑκατέρᾳ καὶ τὴν γωνίαν τῇ γωνίᾳ ἴσην spectively, and have the angle(s) enclosed by the equal
ἔχῃ τὴν ὑπὸ τῶν ἴσων εὐθειῶν περιεχομένην, καὶ τὴν straight-lines equal, then they will also have the base
βάσιν τῂ βάσει ἴσην ἕξει, καὶ τὸ τρίγωνον τῷ τριγώνῳ ἴσον equal to the base, and the triangle will be equal to the triἔσται, καὶ αἱ λοιπαὶ γωνίαι ταῖς λοιπαῖς γωνίαις ἴσαι ἔσονται angle, and the remaining angles subtended by the equal
ἑκατέρα ἑκατέρᾳ, ὑφ᾿ ἃς αἱ ἴσαι πλευραὶ ὑποτείνουσιν. sides will be equal to the corresponding remaining angles.
∆
Β
Α
Γ Ε Ζ B F
A
C E
D
῎Εστω δύο τρίγωνα τὰ ΑΒΓ, ΔΕΖ τὰς δύο πλευρὰς Let ABC and DEF be two triangles having the two
τὰς ΑΒ, ΑΓ ταῖς δυσὶ πλευραῖς ταῖς ΔΕ, ΔΖ ἴσας ἔχοντα sides AB and AC equal to the two sides DE and DF, reἑκατέραν ἑκατέρᾳ τὴν μὲν ΑΒ τῇ ΔΕ τὴν δὲ ΑΓ τῇ ΔΖ spectively. (That is) AB to DE, and AC to DF. And (let)
καὶ γωνίαν τὴν ὑπὸ ΒΑΓ γωνίᾳ τῇ ὑπὸ ΕΔΖ ἴσην. λέγω, the angle BAC (be) equal to the angle EDF. I say that
ὅτι καὶ βάσις ἡ ΒΓ βάσει τῇ ΕΖ ἴση ἐστίν, καὶ τὸ ΑΒΓ the base BC is also equal to the base EF, and triangle
τρίγωνον τῷ ΔΕΖ τριγώνῳ ἴσον ἔσται, καὶ αἱ λοιπαὶ γωνίαι ABC will be equal to triangle DEF, and the remaining
ταῖς λοιπαῖς γωνίαις ἴσαι ἔσονται ἑκατέρα ἑκατέρᾳ, ὑφ᾿ ἃς angles subtended by the equal sides will be equal to the
αἱ ἴσαι πλευραὶ ὑποτείνουσιν, ἡ μὲν ὑπὸ ΑΒΓ τῇ ὑπὸ ΔΕΖ, corresponding remaining angles. (That is) ABC to DEF,
ἡ δὲ ὑπὸ ΑΓΒ τῇ ὑπὸ ΔΖΕ. and ACB to DFE.
᾿Εφαρμοζομένου γὰρ τοῦ ΑΒΓ τριγώνου ἐπὶ τὸ ΔΕΖ For if triangle ABC is applied to triangle DEF,
†
the
τρίγωνον καὶ τιθεμένου τοῦ μὲν Α σημείου ἐπὶ τὸ Δ σημεῖον point A being placed on the point D, and the straight-line
10
STOIQEIWN aþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 1
τῆς δὲ ΑΒ εὐθείας ἐπὶ τὴν ΔΕ, ἐφαρμόσει καὶ τὸ Β σημεῖον AB on DE, then the point B will also coincide with E,
ἐπὶ τὸ Ε διὰ τὸ ἴσην εἶναι τὴν ΑΒ τῇ ΔΕ· ἐφαρμοσάσης δὴ on account of AB being equal to DE. So (because of)
τῆς ΑΒ ἐπὶ τὴν ΔΕ ἐφαρμόσει καὶ ἡ ΑΓ εὐθεῖα ἐπὶ τὴν ΔΖ AB coinciding with DE, the straight-line AC will also
διὰ τὸ ἴσην εἶναι τὴν ὑπὸ ΒΑΓ γωνίαν τῇ ὑπὸ ΕΔΖ· ὥστε καὶ coincide with DF, on account of the angle BAC being
τὸ Γ σημεῖον ἐπὶ τὸ Ζ σημεῖον ἐφαρμόσει διὰ τὸ ἴσην πάλιν equal to EDF. So the point C will also coincide with the
εἶναι τὴν ΑΓ τῇ ΔΖ. ἀλλὰ μὴν καὶ τὸ Β ἐπὶ τὸ Ε ἐφηρμόκει· point F, again on account of AC being equal to DF. But,
ὥστε βάσις ἡ ΒΓ ἐπὶ βάσιν τὴν ΕΖ ἐφαρμόσει. εἰ γὰρ τοῦ point B certainly also coincided with point E, so that the
μὲν Β ἐπὶ τὸ Ε ἐφαρμόσαντος τοῦ δὲ Γ ἐπὶ τὸ Ζ ἡ ΒΓ βάσις base BC will coincide with the base EF. For if B coinἐπὶ τὴν ΕΖ οὐκ ἐφαρμόσει, δύο εὐθεῖαι χωρίον περιέξουσιν· cides with E, and C with F, and the base BC does not
ὅπερ ἐστὶν ἀδύνατον. ἐφαρμόσει ἄρα ἡ ΒΓ βάσις ἐπὶ τὴν coincide with EF, then two straight-lines will encompass
ΕΖ καὶ ἴση αὐτῇ ἔσται· ὥστε καὶ ὅλον τὸ ΑΒΓ τρίγωνον an area. The very thing is impossible [Post. 1].‡ Thus,
ἐπὶ ὅλον τὸ ΔΕΖ τρίγωνον ἐφαρμόσει καὶ ἴσον αὐτῷ ἔσται, the base BC will coincide with EF, and will be equal to
καὶ αἱ λοιπαὶ γωνίαι ἐπὶ τὰς λοιπὰς γωνίας ἐφαρμόσουσι καὶ it [C.N. 4]. So the whole triangle ABC will coincide with
ἴσαι αὐταῖς ἔσονται, ἡ μὲν ὑπὸ ΑΒΓ τῇ ὑπὸ ΔΕΖ ἡ δὲ ὑπὸ the whole triangle DEF, and will be equal to it [C.N. 4].
ΑΓΒ τῇ ὑπὸ ΔΖΕ. And the remaining angles will coincide with the remain-
᾿Εὰν ἄρα δύο τρίγωνα τὰς δύο πλευρὰς [ταῖς] δύο ing angles, and will be equal to them [C.N. 4]. (That is)
πλευραῖς ἴσας ἔχῃ ἑκατέραν ἑκατέρᾳ καὶ τὴν γωνίαν τῇ ABC to DEF, and ACB to DFE [C.N. 4].
γωνίᾳ ἴσην ἔχῃ τὴν ὑπὸ τῶν ἴσων εὐθειῶν περιεχομένην, Thus, if two triangles have two sides equal to two
καὶ τὴν βάσιν τῂ βάσει ἴσην ἕξει, καὶ τὸ τρίγωνον τῷ sides, respectively, and have the angle(s) enclosed by the
τριγώνῳ ἴσον ἔσται, καὶ αἱ λοιπαὶ γωνίαι ταῖς λοιπαῖς equal straight-line equal, then they will also have the base
γωνίαις ἴσαι ἔσονται ἑκατέρα ἑκατέρᾳ, ὑφ᾿ ἃς αἱ ἴσαι πλευραὶ equal to the base, and the triangle will be equal to the triὑποτείνουσιν· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. angle, and the remaining angles subtended by the equal
sides will be equal to the corresponding remaining angles. (Which is) the very thing it was required to show.
† The application of one figure to another should be counted as an additional postulate.
‡ Since Post. 1 implicitly assumes that the straight-line joining two given points is unique.
eþ. Proposition 5
Τῶν ἰσοσκελῶν τριγώνων αἱ τρὸς τῇ βάσει γωνίαι ἴσαι For isosceles triangles, the angles at the base are equal
ἀλλήλαις εἰσίν, καὶ προσεκβληθεισῶν τῶν ἴσων εὐθειῶν αἱ to one another, and if the equal sides are produced then
ὑπὸ τὴν βάσιν γωνίαι ἴσαι ἀλλήλαις ἔσονται. the angles under the base will be equal to one another.
Ε
Α
Β
Ζ
∆
Γ
Η
B
D
F
C
G
A
E
῎Εστω τρίγωνον ἰσοσκελὲς τὸ ΑΒΓ ἴσην ἔχον τὴν Let ABC be an isosceles triangle having the side AB
ΑΒ πλευρὰν τῇ ΑΓ πλευρᾷ, καὶ προσεκβεβλήσθωσαν ἐπ᾿ equal to the side AC, and let the straight-lines BD and
εὐθείας ταῖς ΑΒ, ΑΓ εὐθεῖαι αἱ ΒΔ, ΓΕ· λέγω, ὅτι ἡ μὲν CE have been produced in a straight-line with AB and
ὑπὸ ΑΒΓ γωνία τῇ ὑπὸ ΑΓΒ ἴση ἐστίν, ἡ δὲ ὑπὸ ΓΒΔ τῇ AC (respectively) [Post. 2]. I say that the angle ABC is
ὑπὸ ΒΓΕ. equal to ACB, and (angle) CBD to BCE.
Εἰλήφθω γὰρ ἐπὶ τῆς ΒΔ τυχὸν σημεῖον τὸ Ζ, καὶ For let the point F have been taken at random on BD,
ἀφῃρήσθω ἀπὸ τῆς μείζονος τῆς ΑΕ τῇ ἐλάσσονι τῇ ΑΖ and let AG have been cut off from the greater AE, equal
11
STOIQEIWN aþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 1
ἴση ἡ ΑΗ, καὶ ἐπεζεύχθωσαν αἱ ΖΓ, ΗΒ εὐθεῖαι. to the lesser AF [Prop. 1.3]. Also, let the straight-lines
᾿Επεὶ οὖν ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ μὲν ΑΖ τῇ ΑΗ ἡ δὲ ΑΒ τῇ ΑΓ, FC and GB have been joined [Post. 1].
δύο δὴ αἱ ΖΑ, ΑΓ δυσὶ ταῖς ΗΑ, ΑΒ ἴσαι εἰσὶν ἑκατέρα In fact, since AF is equal to AG, and AB to AC,
ἑκατέρᾳ· καὶ γωνίαν κοινὴν περιέχουσι τὴν ὑπὸ ΖΑΗ· βάσις the two (straight-lines) FA, AC are equal to the two
ἄρα ἡ ΖΓ βάσει τῇ ΗΒ ἴση ἐστίν, καὶ τὸ ΑΖΓ τρίγωνον τῷ (straight-lines) GA, AB, respectively. They also encomΑΗΒ τριγώνῳ ἴσον ἔσται, καὶ αἱ λοιπαὶ γωνίαι ταῖς λοιπαῖς pass a common angle, FAG. Thus, the base FC is equal
γωνίαις ἴσαι ἔσονται ἑκατέρα ἑκατέρᾳ, ὑφ᾿ ἃς αἱ ἴσαι πλευραὶ to the base GB, and the triangle AFC will be equal to the
ὑποτείνουσιν, ἡ μὲν ὑπὸ ΑΓΖ τῇ ὑπὸ ΑΒΗ, ἡ δὲ ὑπὸ ΑΖΓ triangle AGB, and the remaining angles subtendend by
τῇ ὑπὸ ΑΗΒ. καὶ ἐπεὶ ὅλη ἡ ΑΖ ὅλῃ τῇ ΑΗ ἐστιν ἴση, ὧν the equal sides will be equal to the corresponding remainἡ ΑΒ τῇ ΑΓ ἐστιν ἴση, λοιπὴ ἄρα ἡ ΒΖ λοιπῇ τῇ ΓΗ ἐστιν ing angles [Prop. 1.4]. (That is) ACF to ABG, and AFC
ἴση. ἐδείχθη δὲ καὶ ἡ ΖΓ τῇ ΗΒ ἴση· δύο δὴ αἱ ΒΖ, ΖΓ δυσὶ to AGB. And since the whole of AF is equal to the whole
ταῖς ΓΗ, ΗΒ ἴσαι εἰσὶν ἑκατέρα ἑκατέρᾳ· καὶ γωνία ἡ ὑπὸ of AG, within which AB is equal to AC, the remainder
ΒΖΓ γωνίᾳ τῃ ὑπὸ ΓΗΒ ἴση, καὶ βάσις αὐτῶν κοινὴ ἡ ΒΓ· BF is thus equal to the remainder CG [C.N. 3]. But FC
καὶ τὸ ΒΖΓ ἄρα τρίγωνον τῷ ΓΗΒ τριγώνῳ ἴσον ἔσται, καὶ was also shown (to be) equal to GB. So the two (straightαἱ λοιπαὶ γωνίαι ταῖς λοιπαῖς γωνίαις ἴσαι ἔσονται ἑκατέρα lines) BF, FC are equal to the two (straight-lines) CG,
ἑκατέρᾳ, ὑφ᾿ ἃς αἱ ἴσαι πλευραὶ ὑποτείνουσιν· ἴση ἄρα ἐστὶν GB, respectively, and the angle BFC (is) equal to the
ἡ μὲν ὑπὸ ΖΒΓ τῇ ὑπὸ ΗΓΒ ἡ δὲ ὑπὸ ΒΓΖ τῇ ὑπὸ ΓΒΗ. angle CGB, and the base BC is common to them. Thus,
ἐπεὶ οὖν ὅλη ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΒΗ γωνία ὅλῃ τῇ ὑπὸ ΑΓΖ γωνίᾳ the triangle BFC will be equal to the triangle CGB, and
ἐδείχθη ἴση, ὧν ἡ ὑπὸ ΓΒΗ τῇ ὑπὸ ΒΓΖ ἴση, λοιπὴ ἄρα ἡ the remaining angles subtended by the equal sides will be
ὑπὸ ΑΒΓ λοιπῇ τῇ ὑπὸ ΑΓΒ ἐστιν ἴση· καί εἰσι πρὸς τῇ equal to the corresponding remaining angles [Prop. 1.4].
βάσει τοῦ ΑΒΓ τριγώνου. ἐδείχθη δὲ καὶ ἡ ὑπὸ ΖΒΓ τῇ Thus, FBC is equal to GCB, and BCF to CBG. Thereὑπὸ ΗΓΒ ἴση· καί εἰσιν ὑπὸ τὴν βάσιν. fore, since the whole angle ABG was shown (to be) equal
Τῶν ἄρα ἰσοσκελῶν τριγώνων αἱ τρὸς τῇ βάσει γωνίαι to the whole angle ACF, within which CBG is equal to
ἴσαι ἀλλήλαις εἰσίν, καὶ προσεκβληθεισῶν τῶν ἴσων εὐθειῶν BCF, the remainder ABC is thus equal to the remainder
αἱ ὑπὸ τὴν βάσιν γωνίαι ἴσαι ἀλλήλαις ἔσονται· ὅπερ ἔδει ACB [C.N. 3]. And they are at the base of triangle ABC.
δεῖξαι. And FBC was also shown (to be) equal to GCB. And
they are under the base.
Thus, for isosceles triangles, the angles at the base are
equal to one another, and if the equal sides are produced
then the angles under the base will be equal to one another. (Which is) the very thing it was required to show.
þ. Proposition 6
᾿Εὰν τριγώνου αἱ δύο γωνίαι ἴσαι ἀλλήλαις ὦσιν, καὶ If a triangle has two angles equal to one another then
αἱ ὑπὸ τὰς ἴσας γωνίας ὑποτείνουσαι πλευραὶ ἴσαι ἀλλήλαις the sides subtending the equal angles will also be equal
ἔσονται. to one another.
Α
Β Γ
∆ D
A
B C
῎Εστω τρίγωνον τὸ ΑΒΓ ἴσην ἔχον τὴν ὑπὸ ΑΒΓ γωνίαν Let ABC be a triangle having the angle ABC equal
τῇ ὑπὸ ΑΓΒ γωνίᾳ· λέγω, ὅτι καὶ πλευρὰ ἡ ΑΒ πλευρᾷ τῇ to the angle ACB. I say that side AB is also equal to side
ΑΓ ἐστιν ἴση. AC.
12
STOIQEIWN aþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 1
Εἰ γὰρ ἄνισός ἐστιν ἡ ΑΒ τῇ ΑΓ, ἡ ἑτέρα αὐτῶν μείζων For if AB is unequal to AC then one of them is
ἐστίν. ἔστω μείζων ἡ ΑΒ, καὶ ἀφῃρήσθω ἀπὸ τῆς μείζονος greater. Let AB be greater. And let DB, equal to
τῆς ΑΒ τῇ ἐλάττονι τῇ ΑΓ ἴση ἡ ΔΒ, καὶ ἐπεζεύχθω ἡ ΔΓ. the lesser AC, have been cut off from the greater AB
᾿Επεὶ οὖν ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ΔΒ τῇ ΑΓ κοινὴ δὲ ἡ ΒΓ, δύο δὴ [Prop. 1.3]. And let DC have been joined [Post. 1].
αἱ ΔΒ, ΒΓ δύο ταῖς ΑΓ, ΓΒ ἴσαι εἰσὶν ἑκατέρα ἑκατέρᾳ, καὶ Therefore, since DB is equal to AC, and BC (is) comγωνία ἡ ὑπὸ ΔΒΓ γωνίᾳ τῇ ὑπὸ ΑΓΒ ἐστιν ἴση· βάσις ἄρα ἡ mon, the two sides DB, BC are equal to the two sides
ΔΓ βάσει τῇ ΑΒ ἴση ἐστίν, καὶ τὸ ΔΒΓ τρίγωνον τῷ ΑΓΒ AC, CB, respectively, and the angle DBC is equal to the
τριγώνῳ ἴσον ἔσται, τὸ ἔλασσον τῷ μείζονι· ὅπερ ἄτοπον· angle ACB. Thus, the base DC is equal to the base AB,
οὐκ ἄρα ἄνισός ἐστιν ἡ ΑΒ τῇ ΑΓ· ἴση ἄρα. and the triangle DBC will be equal to the triangle ACB
᾿Εὰν ἄρα τριγώνου αἱ δὑο γωνίαι ἴσαι ἀλλήλαις ὦσιν, καὶ [Prop. 1.4], the lesser to the greater. The very notion (is)
αἱ ὑπὸ τὰς ἴσας γωνίας ὑποτείνουσαι πλευραὶ ἴσαι ἀλλήλαις absurd [C.N. 5]. Thus, AB is not unequal to AC. Thus,
ἔσονται· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. (it is) equal.†
Thus, if a triangle has two angles equal to one another
then the sides subtending the equal angles will also be
equal to one another. (Which is) the very thing it was
required to show.
† Here, use is made of the previously unmentioned common notion that if two quantities are not unequal then they must be equal. Later on, use
is made of the closely related common notion that if two quantities are not greater than or less than one another, respectively, then they must be
equal to one another.
zþ. Proposition 7
᾿Επὶ τῆς αὐτῆς εὐθείας δύο ταῖς αὐταῖς εὐθείαις ἄλλαι On the same straight-line, two other straight-lines
δύο εὐθεῖαι ἴσαι ἑκατέρα ἑκατέρᾳ οὐ συσταθήσονται πρὸς equal, respectively, to two (given) straight-lines (which
ἄλλῳ καὶ ἄλλῳ σημείῳ ἐπὶ τὰ αὐτὰ μέρη τὰ αὐτὰ πέρατα meet) cannot be constructed (meeting) at a different
ἔχουσαι ταῖς ἐξ ἀρχῆς εὐθείαις. point on the same side (of the straight-line), but having
the same ends as the given straight-lines.
Α Β
Γ
∆
A B
C
D
Εἰ γὰρ δυνατόν, ἐπὶ τῆς αὐτῆς εὐθείας τῆς ΑΒ δύο ταῖς For, if possible, let the two straight-lines AC, CB,
αὐταῖς εὐθείαις ταῖς ΑΓ, ΓΒ ἄλλαι δύο εὐθεῖαι αἱ ΑΔ, ΔΒ equal to two other straight-lines AD, DB, respectively,
ἴσαι ἑκατέρα ἑκατέρᾳ συνεστάτωσαν πρὸς ἄλλῳ καὶ ἄλλῳ have been constructed on the same straight-line AB,
σημείῳ τῷ τε Γ καὶ Δ ἐπὶ τὰ αὐτὰ μέρη τὰ αὐτὰ πέρατα meeting at different points, C and D, on the same side
ἔχουσαι, ὥστε ἴσην εἶναι τὴν μὲν ΓΑ τῇ ΔΑ τὸ αὐτὸ πέρας (of AB), and having the same ends (on AB). So CA is
ἔχουσαν αὐτῇ τὸ Α, τὴν δὲ ΓΒ τῇ ΔΒ τὸ αὐτὸ πέρας ἔχου- equal to DA, having the same end A as it, and CB is
σαν αὐτῇ τὸ Β, καὶ ἐπεζεύχθω ἡ ΓΔ. equal to DB, having the same end B as it. And let CD
᾿Επεὶ οὖν ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ΑΓ τῇ ΑΔ, ἴση ἐστὶ καὶ γωνία ἡ have been joined [Post. 1].
ὑπὸ ΑΓΔ τῇ ὑπὸ ΑΔΓ· μείζων ἄρα ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΔΓ τῆς ὑπὸ Therefore, since AC is equal to AD, the angle ACD
ΔΓΒ· πολλῷ ἄρα ἡ ὑπὸ ΓΔΒ μείζων ἐστί τῆς ὑπὸ ΔΓΒ. is also equal to angle ADC [Prop. 1.5]. Thus, ADC (is)
πάλιν ἐπεὶ ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ΓΒ τῇ ΔΒ, ἴση ἐστὶ καὶ γωνία ἡ greater than DCB [C.N. 5]. Thus, CDB is much greater
ὑπὸ ΓΔΒ γωνίᾳ τῇ ὑπὸ ΔΓΒ. ἐδείχθη δὲ αὐτῆς καὶ πολλῷ than DCB [C.N. 5]. Again, since CB is equal to DB, the
μείζων· ὅπερ ἐστὶν ἀδύνατον. angle CDB is also equal to angle DCB [Prop. 1.5]. But
Οὐκ ἄρα ἐπὶ τῆς αὐτῆς εὐθείας δύο ταῖς αὐταῖς εὐθείαις it was shown that the former (angle) is also much greater
13
STOIQEIWN aþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 1
ἄλλαι δύο εὐθεῖαι ἴσαι ἑκατέρα ἑκατέρᾳ συσταθήσονται πρὸς (than the latter). The very thing is impossible.
ἄλλῳ καὶ ἄλλῳ σημείῳ ἐπὶ τὰ αὐτὰ μέρη τὰ αὐτὰ πέρατα Thus, on the same straight-line, two other straightἔχουσαι ταῖς ἐξ ἀρχῆς εὐθείαις· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. lines equal, respectively, to two (given) straight-lines
(which meet) cannot be constructed (meeting) at a different point on the same side (of the straight-line), but
having the same ends as the given straight-lines. (Which
is) the very thing it was required to show.
hþ. Proposition 8
᾿Εὰν δύο τρίγωνα τὰς δύο πλευρὰς [ταῖς] δύο πλευραῖς If two triangles have two sides equal to two sides, reἴσας ἔχῃ ἑκατέραν ἑκατέρᾳ, ἔχῃ δὲ καὶ τὴν βάσιν τῇ βάσει spectively, and also have the base equal to the base, then
ἴσην, καὶ τὴν γωνίαν τῇ γωνίᾳ ἴσην ἕξει τὴν ὑπὸ τῶν ἴσων they will also have equal the angles encompassed by the
εὐθειῶν περιεχομένην. equal straight-lines.
Ε
Α
Β
Γ
∆ Η
Ζ
D
G
B
E
F
C
A
῎Εστω δύο τρίγωνα τὰ ΑΒΓ, ΔΕΖ τὰς δύο πλευρὰς Let ABC and DEF be two triangles having the two
τὰς ΑΒ, ΑΓ ταῖς δύο πλευραῖς ταῖς ΔΕ, ΔΖ ἴσας ἔχοντα sides AB and AC equal to the two sides DE and DF,
ἑκατέραν ἑκατέρᾳ, τὴν μὲν ΑΒ τῇ ΔΕ τὴν δὲ ΑΓ τῇ ΔΖ· respectively. (That is) AB to DE, and AC to DF. Let
ἐχέτω δὲ καὶ βάσιν τὴν ΒΓ βάσει τῇ ΕΖ ἴσην· λέγω, ὅτι καὶ them also have the base BC equal to the base EF. I say
γωνία ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΑΓ γωνίᾳ τῇ ὑπὸ ΕΔΖ ἐστιν ἴση. that the angle BAC is also equal to the angle EDF.
᾿Εφαρμοζομένου γὰρ τοῦ ΑΒΓ τριγώνου ἐπὶ τὸ ΔΕΖ For if triangle ABC is applied to triangle DEF, the
τρίγωνον καὶ τιθεμένου τοῦ μὲν Β σημείου ἐπὶ τὸ Ε σημεῖον point B being placed on point E, and the straight-line
τῆς δὲ ΒΓ εὐθείας ἐπὶ τὴν ΕΖ ἐφαρμόσει καὶ τὸ Γ σημεῖον BC on EF, then point C will also coincide with F, on
ἐπὶ τὸ Ζ διὰ τὸ ἴσην εἶναι τὴν ΒΓ τῇ ΕΖ· ἐφαρμοσάσης δὴ account of BC being equal to EF. So (because of) BC
τῆς ΒΓ ἐπὶ τὴν ΕΖ ἐφαρμόσουσι καὶ αἱ ΒΑ, ΓΑ ἐπὶ τὰς ΕΔ, coinciding with EF, (the sides) BA and CA will also coΔΖ. εἰ γὰρ βάσις μὲν ἡ ΒΓ ἐπὶ βάσιν τὴν ΕΖ ἐφαρμόσει, αἱ incide with ED and DF (respectively). For if base BC
δὲ ΒΑ, ΑΓ πλευραὶ ἐπὶ τὰς ΕΔ, ΔΖ οὐκ ἐφαρμόσουσιν coincides with base EF, but the sides AB and AC do not
ἀλλὰ παραλλάξουσιν ὡς αἱ ΕΗ, ΗΖ, συσταθήσονται ἐπὶ τῆς coincide with ED and DF (respectively), but miss like
αὐτῆς εὐθείας δύο ταῖς αὐταῖς εὐθείαις ἄλλαι δύο εὐθεῖαι EG and GF (in the above figure), then we will have conἴσαι ἑκατέρα ἑκατέρᾳ πρὸς ἄλλῳ καὶ ἄλλῳ σημείῳ ἐπὶ τὰ structed upon the same straight-line, two other straightαὐτὰ μέρη τὰ αὐτὰ πέρατα ἔχουσαι. οὐ συνίστανται δέ· lines equal, respectively, to two (given) straight-lines,
οὐκ ἄρα ἐφαρμοζομένης τῆς ΒΓ βάσεως ἐπὶ τὴν ΕΖ βάσιν and (meeting) at a different point on the same side (of
οὐκ ἐφαρμόσουσι καὶ αἱ ΒΑ, ΑΓ πλευραὶ ἐπὶ τὰς ΕΔ, ΔΖ. the straight-line), but having the same ends. But (such
ἐφαρμόσουσιν ἄρα· ὥστε καὶ γωνία ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΑΓ ἐπὶ γωνίαν straight-lines) cannot be constructed [Prop. 1.7]. Thus,
τὴν ὑπὸ ΕΔΖ ἐφαρμόσει καὶ ἴση αὐτῇ ἔσται. the base BC being applied to the base EF, the sides BA
᾿Εὰν ἄρα δύο τρίγωνα τὰς δύο πλευρὰς [ταῖς] δύο and AC cannot not coincide with ED and DF (respecπλευραῖς ἴσας ἔχῃ ἑκατέραν ἑκατέρᾳ καὶ τὴν βάσιν τῇ βάσει tively). Thus, they will coincide. So the angle BAC will
ἴσην ἔχῃ, καὶ τὴν γωνίαν τῇ γωνίᾳ ἴσην ἕξει τὴν ὑπὸ τῶν also coincide with angle EDF, and will be equal to it
ἴσων εὐθειῶν περιεχομένην· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. [C.N. 4].
Thus, if two triangles have two sides equal to two
side, respectively, and have the base equal to the base,
14
STOIQEIWN aþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 1
then they will also have equal the angles encompassed
by the equal straight-lines. (Which is) the very thing it
was required to show.
jþ. Proposition 9
Τὴν δοθεῖσαν γωνίαν εὐθύγραμμον δίχα τεμεῖν. To cut a given rectilinear angle in half.
Ε
Α
Β Γ
∆
Ζ F
D
B C
E
A
῎Εστω ἡ δοθεῖσα γωνία εὐθύγραμμος ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΑΓ. δεῖ Let BAC be the given rectilinear angle. So it is reδὴ αὐτὴν δίχα τεμεῖν. quired to cut it in half.
Εἰλήφθω ἐπὶ τῆς ΑΒ τυχὸν σημεῖον τὸ Δ, καὶ ἀφῃρήσθω Let the point D have been taken at random on AB,
ἀπὸ τῆς ΑΓ τῇ ΑΔ ἴση ἡ ΑΕ, καὶ ἐπεζεύχθω ἡ ΔΕ, καὶ and let AE, equal to AD, have been cut off from AC
συνεστάτω ἐπὶ τῆς ΔΕ τρίγωνον ἰσόπλευρον τὸ ΔΕΖ, καὶ [Prop. 1.3], and let DE have been joined. And let the
ἐπεζεύχθω ἡ ΑΖ· λέγω, ὅτι ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΑΓ γωνία δίχα τέτμηται equilateral triangle DEF have been constructed upon
ὑπὸ τῆς ΑΖ εὐθείας. DE [Prop. 1.1], and let AF have been joined. I say that
᾿Επεὶ γὰρ ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ΑΔ τῇ ΑΕ, κοινὴ δὲ ἡ ΑΖ, δύο δὴ the angle BAC has been cut in half by the straight-line
αἱ ΔΑ, ΑΖ δυσὶ ταῖς ΕΑ, ΑΖ ἴσαι εἰσὶν ἑκατέρα ἑκατέρᾳ. AF.
καὶ βάσις ἡ ΔΖ βάσει τῇ ΕΖ ἴση ἐστίν· γωνία ἄρα ἡ ὑπὸ For since AD is equal to AE, and AF is common,
ΔΑΖ γωνίᾳ τῇ ὑπὸ ΕΑΖ ἴση ἐστίν. the two (straight-lines) DA, AF are equal to the two
῾Η ἄρα δοθεῖσα γωνία εὐθύγραμμος ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΑΓ δίχα (straight-lines) EA, AF, respectively. And the base DF
τέτμηται ὑπὸ τῆς ΑΖ εὐθείας· ὅπερ ἔδει ποιῆσαι. is equal to the base EF. Thus, angle DAF is equal to
angle EAF [Prop. 1.8].
Thus, the given rectilinear angle BAC has been cut in
half by the straight-line AF. (Which is) the very thing it
was required to do.
iþ. Proposition 10
Τὴν δοθεῖσαν εὐθεῖαν πεπερασμένην δίχα τεμεῖν. To cut a given finite straight-line in half.
῎Εστω ἡ δοθεῖσα εὐθεῖα πεπερασμένη ἡ ΑΒ· δεῖ δὴ τὴν Let AB be the given finite straight-line. So it is reΑΒ εὐθεῖαν πεπερασμένην δίχα τεμεῖν. quired to cut the finite straight-line AB in half.
Συνεστάτω ἐπ᾿ αὐτῆς τρίγωνον ἰσόπλευρον τὸ ΑΒΓ, καὶ Let the equilateral triangle ABC have been conτετμήσθω ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΓΒ γωνία δίχα τῇ ΓΔ εὐθείᾳ· λέγω, ὅτι structed upon (AB) [Prop. 1.1], and let the angle ACB
ἡ ΑΒ εὐθεῖα δίχα τέτμηται κατὰ τὸ Δ σημεῖον. have been cut in half by the straight-line CD [Prop. 1.9].
᾿Επεὶ γὰρ ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ΑΓ τῇ ΓΒ, κοινὴ δὲ ἡ ΓΔ, δύο δὴ I say that the straight-line AB has been cut in half at
αἱ ΑΓ, ΓΔ δύο ταῖς ΒΓ, ΓΔ ἴσαι εἰσὶν ἑκατέρα ἑκατέρᾳ· καὶ point D.
γωνία ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΓΔ γωνίᾳ τῇ ὑπὸ ΒΓΔ ἴση ἐστίν· βάσις ἄρα For since AC is equal to CB, and CD (is) common,
15
STOIQEIWN aþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 1
ἡ ΑΔ βάσει τῇ ΒΔ ἴση ἐστίν. the two (straight-lines) AC, CD are equal to the two
(straight-lines) BC, CD, respectively. And the angle
ACD is equal to the angle BCD. Thus, the base AD
is equal to the base BD [Prop. 1.4].
Α
∆
Β
Γ
A B
D
C
῾Η ἄρα δοθεῖσα εὐθεῖα πεπερασμένη ἡ ΑΒ δίχα τέτμηται Thus, the given finite straight-line AB has been cut
κατὰ τὸ Δ· ὅπερ ἔδει ποιῆσαι. in half at (point) D. (Which is) the very thing it was
required to do.
iaþ. Proposition 11
Τῇ δοθείσῃ εὐθείᾳ ἀπὸ τοῦ πρὸς αὐτῇ δοθέντος σημείου To draw a straight-line at right-angles to a given
πρὸς ὀρθὰς γωνίας εὐθεῖαν γραμμὴν ἀγαγεῖν. straight-line from a given point on it.
Α Β
∆ Γ Ε
Ζ
D
A
F
C E
B
῎Εστω ἡ μὲν δοθεῖσα εὐθεῖα ἡ ΑΒ τὸ δὲ δοθὲν σημεῖον Let AB be the given straight-line, and C the given
ἐπ᾿ αὐτῆς τὸ Γ· δεῖ δὴ ἀπὸ τοῦ Γ σημείου τῇ ΑΒ εὐθείᾳ point on it. So it is required to draw a straight-line from
πρὸς ὀρθὰς γωνίας εὐθεῖαν γραμμὴν ἀγαγεῖν. the point C at right-angles to the straight-line AB.
Εἰλήφθω ἐπὶ τῆς ΑΓ τυχὸν σημεῖον τὸ Δ, καὶ κείσθω Let the point D be have been taken at random on AC,
τῇ ΓΔ ἴση ἡ ΓΕ, καὶ συνεστάτω ἐπὶ τῆς ΔΕ τρίγωνον and let CE be made equal to CD [Prop. 1.3], and let the
ἰσόπλευρον τὸ ΖΔΕ, καὶ ἐπεζεύχθω ἡ ΖΓ· λέγω, ὅτι τῇ equilateral triangle FDE have been constructed on DE
δοθείσῃ εὐθείᾳ τῇ ΑΒ ἀπὸ τοῦ πρὸς αὐτῇ δοθέντος σημείου [Prop. 1.1], and let FC have been joined. I say that the
τοῦ Γ πρὸς ὀρθὰς γωνίας εὐθεῖα γραμμὴ ἦκται ἡ ΖΓ. straight-line FC has been drawn at right-angles to the
᾿Επεὶ γὰρ ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ΔΓ τῇ ΓΕ, κοινὴ δὲ ἡ ΓΖ, δύο given straight-line AB from the given point C on it.
δὴ αἱ ΔΓ, ΓΖ δυσὶ ταῖς ΕΓ, ΓΖ ἴσαι εἰσὶν ἑκατέρα ἑκατέρᾳ· For since DC is equal to CE, and CF is common,
καὶ βάσις ἡ ΔΖ βάσει τῇ ΖΕ ἴση ἐστίν· γωνία ἄρα ἡ ὑπὸ the two (straight-lines) DC, CF are equal to the two
ΔΓΖ γωνίᾳ τῇ ὑπὸ ΕΓΖ ἴση ἐστίν· καί εἰσιν ἐφεξῆς. ὅταν (straight-lines), EC, CF, respectively. And the base DF
δὲ εὐθεῖα ἐπ᾿ εὐθεῖαν σταθεῖσα τὰς ἐφεξῆς γωνίας ἴσας is equal to the base FE. Thus, the angle DCF is equal
ἀλλήλαις ποιῇ, ὀρθὴ ἑκατέρα τῶν ἴσων γωνιῶν ἐστιν· ὀρθὴ to the angle ECF [Prop. 1.8], and they are adjacent.
ἄρα ἐστὶν ἑκατέρα τῶν ὑπὸ ΔΓΖ, ΖΓΕ. But when a straight-line stood on a(nother) straight-line
16
STOIQEIWN aþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 1
Τῇ ἄρα δοθείσῃ εὐθείᾳ τῇ ΑΒ ἀπὸ τοῦ πρὸς αὐτῇ makes the adjacent angles equal to one another, each of
δοθέντος σημείου τοῦ Γ πρὸς ὀρθὰς γωνίας εὐθεῖα γραμμὴ the equal angles is a right-angle [Def. 1.10]. Thus, each
ἦκται ἡ ΓΖ· ὅπερ ἔδει ποιῆσαι. of the (angles) DCF and FCE is a right-angle.
Thus, the straight-line CF has been drawn at rightangles to the given straight-line AB from the given point
C on it. (Which is) the very thing it was required to do.
ibþ. Proposition 12
᾿Επὶ τὴν δοθεῖσαν εὐθεῖαν ἄπειρον ἀπὸ τοῦ δοθέντος To draw a straight-line perpendicular to a given infiσημείου, ὃ μή ἐστιν ἐπ᾿ αὐτῆς, κάθετον εὐθεῖαν γραμμὴν nite straight-line from a given point which is not on it.
ἀγαγεῖν.
∆
Α Β
Γ
Η Ε
Ζ
Θ
D
A
G H
F
E
B
C
῎Εστω ἡ μὲν δοθεῖσα εὐθεῖα ἄπειρος ἡ ΑΒ τὸ δὲ δοθὲν Let AB be the given infinite straight-line and C the
σημεῖον, ὃ μή ἐστιν ἐπ᾿ αὐτῆς, τὸ Γ· δεῖ δὴ ἐπὶ τὴν δοθεῖσαν given point, which is not on (AB). So it is required to
εὐθεῖαν ἄπειρον τὴν ΑΒ ἀπὸ τοῦ δοθέντος σημείου τοῦ Γ, draw a straight-line perpendicular to the given infinite
ὃ μή ἐστιν ἐπ᾿ αὐτῆς, κάθετον εὐθεῖαν γραμμὴν ἀγαγεῖν. straight-line AB from the given point C, which is not on
Εἰλήφθω γὰρ ἐπὶ τὰ ἕτερα μέρη τῆς ΑΒ εὐθείας τυχὸν (AB).
σημεῖον τὸ Δ, καὶ κέντρῳ μὲν τῷ Γ διαστήματι δὲ τῷ ΓΔ For let point D have been taken at random on the
κύκλος γεγράφθω ὁ ΕΖΗ, καὶ τετμήσθω ἡ ΕΗ εὐθεῖα δίχα other side (to C) of the straight-line AB, and let the
κατὰ τὸ Θ, καὶ ἐπεζεύχθωσαν αἱ ΓΗ, ΓΘ, ΓΕ εὐθεῖαι· circle EFG have been drawn with center C and radius
λέγω, ὅτι ἐπὶ τὴν δοθεῖσαν εὐθεῖαν ἄπειρον τὴν ΑΒ ἀπὸ CD [Post. 3], and let the straight-line EG have been cut
τοῦ δοθέντος σημείου τοῦ Γ, ὃ μή ἐστιν ἐπ᾿ αὐτῆς, κάθετος in half at (point) H [Prop. 1.10], and let the straightἦκται ἡ ΓΘ. lines CG, CH, and CE have been joined. I say that the
᾿Επεὶ γὰρ ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ΗΘ τῇ ΘΕ, κοινὴ δὲ ἡ ΘΓ, δύο (straight-line) CH has been drawn perpendicular to the
δὴ αἱ ΗΘ, ΘΓ δύο ταῖς ΕΘ, ΘΓ ἴσαι εἱσὶν ἑκατέρα ἑκατέρᾳ· given infinite straight-line AB from the given point C,
καὶ βάσις ἡ ΓΗ βάσει τῇ ΓΕ ἐστιν ἴση· γωνία ἄρα ἡ ὑπὸ which is not on (AB).
ΓΘΗ γωνίᾳ τῇ ὑπὸ ΕΘΓ ἐστιν ἴση. καί εἰσιν ἐφεξῆς. ὅταν For since GH is equal to HE, and HC (is) common,
δὲ εὐθεῖα ἐπ᾿ εὐθεῖαν σταθεῖσα τὰς ἐφεξῆς γωνίας ἴσας the two (straight-lines) GH, HC are equal to the two
ἀλλήλαις ποιῇ, ὀρθὴ ἑκατέρα τῶν ἴσων γωνιῶν ἐστιν, καὶ (straight-lines) EH, HC, respectively, and the base CG
ἡ ἐφεστηκυῖα εὐθεῖα κάθετος καλεῖται ἐφ᾿ ἣν ἐφέστηκεν. is equal to the base CE. Thus, the angle CHG is equal
᾿Επὶ τὴν δοθεῖσαν ἄρα εὐθεῖαν ἄπειρον τὴν ΑΒ ἀπὸ τοῦ to the angle EHC [Prop. 1.8], and they are adjacent.
δοθέντος σημείου τοῦ Γ, ὃ μή ἐστιν ἐπ᾿ αὐτῆς, κάθετος But when a straight-line stood on a(nother) straight-line
ἦκται ἡ ΓΘ· ὅπερ ἔδει ποιῆσαι. makes the adjacent angles equal to one another, each of
the equal angles is a right-angle, and the former straightline is called a perpendicular to that upon which it stands
[Def. 1.10].
Thus, the (straight-line) CH has been drawn perpendicular to the given infinite straight-line AB from the
17
STOIQEIWN aþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 1
given point C, which is not on (AB). (Which is) the very
thing it was required to do.
igþ. Proposition 13
᾿Εὰν εὐθεῖα ἐπ᾿ εὐθεῖαν σταθεῖσα γωνίας ποιῇ, ἤτοι δύο If a straight-line stood on a(nother) straight-line
ὀρθὰς ἢ δυσὶν ὀρθαῖς ἴσας ποιήσει. makes angles, it will certainly either make two rightangles, or (angles whose sum is) equal to two rightangles.
Γ
Ε Α
∆ Β C
A
E
D B
Εὐθεῖα γάρ τις ἡ ΑΒ ἐπ᾿ εὐθεῖαν τὴν ΓΔ σταθεῖσα For let some straight-line AB stood on the straightγωνίας ποιείτω τὰς ὑπὸ ΓΒΑ, ΑΒΔ· λὲγω, ὅτι αἱ ὑπὸ ΓΒΑ, line CD make the angles CBA and ABD. I say that
ΑΒΔ γωνίαι ἤτοι δύο ὀρθαί εἰσιν ἢ δυσὶν ὀρθαῖς ἴσαι. the angles CBA and ABD are certainly either two rightΕἰ μὲν οὖν ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ὑπὸ ΓΒΑ τῇ ὑπὸ ΑΒΔ, δύο ὀρθαί angles, or (have a sum) equal to two right-angles.
εἰσιν. εἰ δὲ οὔ, ἤχθω ἀπὸ τοῦ Β σημείου τῇ ΓΔ [εὐθείᾳ] πρὸς In fact, if CBA is equal to ABD then they are two
ὀρθὰς ἡ ΒΕ· αἱ ἄρα ὑπὸ ΓΒΕ, ΕΒΔ δύο ὀρθαί εἰσιν· καὶ right-angles [Def. 1.10]. But, if not, let BE have been
ἐπεὶ ἡ ὑπὸ ΓΒΕ δυσὶ ταῖς ὑπὸ ΓΒΑ, ΑΒΕ ἴση ἐστίν, κοινὴ drawn from the point B at right-angles to [the straightπροσκείσθω ἡ ὑπὸ ΕΒΔ· αἱ ἄρα ὑπὸ ΓΒΕ, ΕΒΔ τρισὶ ταῖς line] CD [Prop. 1.11]. Thus, CBE and EBD are two
ὑπὸ ΓΒΑ, ΑΒΕ, ΕΒΔ ἴσαι εἰσίν. πάλιν, ἐπεὶ ἡ ὑπὸ ΔΒΑ right-angles. And since CBE is equal to the two (anδυσὶ ταῖς ὑπὸ ΔΒΕ, ΕΒΑ ἴση ἐστίν, κοινὴ προσκείσθω ἡ gles) CBA and ABE, let EBD have been added to both.
ὑπὸ ΑΒΓ· αἱ ἄρα ὑπὸ ΔΒΑ, ΑΒΓ τρισὶ ταῖς ὑπὸ ΔΒΕ, ΕΒΑ, Thus, the (sum of the angles) CBE and EBD is equal to
ΑΒΓ ἴσαι εἰσίν. ἐδείχθησαν δὲ καὶ αἱ ὑπὸ ΓΒΕ, ΕΒΔ τρισὶ the (sum of the) three (angles) CBA, ABE, and EBD
ταῖς αὐταῖς ἴσαι· τὰ δὲ τῷ αὐτῷ ἴσα καὶ ἀλλήλοις ἐστὶν ἴσα· [C.N. 2]. Again, since DBA is equal to the two (anκαὶ αἱ ὑπὸ ΓΒΕ, ΕΒΔ ἄρα ταῖς ὑπὸ ΔΒΑ, ΑΒΓ ἴσαι εἰσίν· gles) DBE and EBA, let ABC have been added to both.
ἀλλὰ αἱ ὑπὸ ΓΒΕ, ΕΒΔ δύο ὀρθαί εἰσιν· καὶ αἱ ὑπὸ ΔΒΑ, Thus, the (sum of the angles) DBA and ABC is equal to
ΑΒΓ ἄρα δυσὶν ὀρθαῖς ἴσαι εἰσίν. the (sum of the) three (angles) DBE, EBA, and ABC
᾿Εὰν ἄρα εὐθεῖα ἐπ᾿ εὐθεῖαν σταθεῖσα γωνίας ποιῇ, ἤτοι [C.N. 2]. But (the sum of) CBE and EBD was also
δύο ὀρθὰς ἢ δυσὶν ὀρθαῖς ἴσας ποιήσει· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. shown (to be) equal to the (sum of the) same three (angles). And things equal to the same thing are also equal
to one another [C.N. 1]. Therefore, (the sum of) CBE
and EBD is also equal to (the sum of) DBA and ABC.
But, (the sum of) CBE and EBD is two right-angles.
Thus, (the sum of) ABD and ABC is also equal to two
right-angles.
Thus, if a straight-line stood on a(nother) straightline makes angles, it will certainly either make two rightangles, or (angles whose sum is) equal to two rightangles. (Which is) the very thing it was required to show.
18
STOIQEIWN aþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 1
idþ. Proposition 14
᾿Εὰν πρός τινι εὐθείᾳ καὶ τῷ πρὸς αὐτῇ σημείῳ δύο If two straight-lines, not lying on the same side, make
εὐθεῖαι μὴ ἐπὶ τὰ αὐτὰ μέρη κείμεναι τὰς ἐφεξῆς γωνίας adjacent angles (whose sum is) equal to two right-angles
δυσὶν ὀρθαῖς ἴσας ποιῶσιν, ἐπ᾿ εὐθείας ἔσονται ἀλλήλαις αἱ with some straight-line, at a point on it, then the two
εὐθεῖαι. straight-lines will be straight-on (with respect) to one another.
Β
Α
Γ ∆
Ε
C D B
A E
Πρὸς γάρ τινι εὐθείᾳ τῇ ΑΒ καὶ τῷ πρὸς αὐτῇ σημείῳ For let two straight-lines BC and BD, not lying on the
τῷ Β δύο εὐθεῖαι αἱ ΒΓ, ΒΔ μὴ ἐπὶ τὰ αὐτὰ μέρη κείμεναι same side, make adjacent angles ABC and ABD (whose
τὰς ἐφεξῆς γωνίας τὰς ὑπὸ ΑΒΓ, ΑΒΔ δύο ὀρθαῖς ἴσας sum is) equal to two right-angles with some straight-line
ποιείτωσαν· λέγω, ὅτι ἐπ᾿ εὐθείας ἐστὶ τῇ ΓΒ ἡ ΒΔ. AB, at the point B on it. I say that BD is straight-on with
Εἰ γὰρ μή ἐστι τῇ ΒΓ ἐπ᾿ εὐθείας ἡ ΒΔ, ἔστω τῇ ΓΒ respect to CB.
ἐπ᾿ εὐθείας ἡ ΒΕ. For if BD is not straight-on to BC then let BE be
᾿Επεὶ οὖν εὐθεῖα ἡ ΑΒ ἐπ᾿ εὐθεῖαν τὴν ΓΒΕ ἐφέστηκεν, straight-on to CB.
αἱ ἄρα ὑπὸ ΑΒΓ, ΑΒΕ γωνίαι δύο ὀρθαῖς ἴσαι εἰσίν· εἰσὶ δὲ Therefore, since the straight-line AB stands on the
καὶ αἱ ὑπὸ ΑΒΓ, ΑΒΔ δύο ὀρθαῖς ἴσαι· αἱ ἄρα ὑπὸ ΓΒΑ, straight-line CBE, the (sum of the) angles ABC and
ΑΒΕ ταῖς ὑπὸ ΓΒΑ, ΑΒΔ ἴσαι εἰσίν. κοινὴ ἀφῃρήσθω ἡ ABE is thus equal to two right-angles [Prop. 1.13]. But
ὑπὸ ΓΒΑ· λοιπὴ ἄρα ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΒΕ λοιπῇ τῇ ὑπὸ ΑΒΔ ἐστιν (the sum of) ABC and ABD is also equal to two rightἴση, ἡ ἐλάσσων τῇ μείζονι· ὅπερ ἐστὶν ἀδύνατον. οὐκ ἄρα angles. Thus, (the sum of angles) CBA and ABE is equal
ἐπ᾿ εὐθείας ἐστὶν ἡ ΒΕ τῇ ΓΒ. ὁμοίως δὴ δείξομεν, ὅτι οὐδὲ to (the sum of angles) CBA and ABD [C.N. 1]. Let (anἄλλη τις πλὴν τῆς ΒΔ· ἐπ᾿ εὐθείας ἄρα ἐστὶν ἡ ΓΒ τῇ ΒΔ. gle) CBA have been subtracted from both. Thus, the re-
᾿Εὰν ἄρα πρός τινι εὐθείᾳ καὶ τῷ πρὸς αὐτῇ σημείῳ mainder ABE is equal to the remainder ABD [C.N. 3],
δύο εὐθεῖαι μὴ ἐπὶ αὐτὰ μέρη κείμεναι τὰς ἐφεξῆς γωνίας the lesser to the greater. The very thing is impossible.
δυσὶν ὀρθαῖς ἴσας ποιῶσιν, ἐπ᾿ εὐθείας ἔσονται ἀλλήλαις αἱ Thus, BE is not straight-on with respect to CB. Simiεὐθεῖαι· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. larly, we can show that neither (is) any other (straightline) than BD. Thus, CB is straight-on with respect to
BD.
Thus, if two straight-lines, not lying on the same side,
make adjacent angles (whose sum is) equal to two rightangles with some straight-line, at a point on it, then the
two straight-lines will be straight-on (with respect) to
one another. (Which is) the very thing it was required
to show.
ieþ. Proposition 15
᾿Εὰν δύο εὐθεῖαι τέμνωσιν ἀλλήλας, τὰς κατὰ κορυφὴν If two straight-lines cut one another then they make
γωνίας ἴσας ἀλλήλαις ποιοῦσιν. the vertically opposite angles equal to one another.
19
STOIQEIWN aþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 1
Δύο γὰρ εὐθεῖαι αἱ ΑΒ, ΓΔ τεμνέτωσαν ἀλλήλας κατὰ For let the two straight-lines AB and CD cut one anτὸ Ε σημεῖον· λέγω, ὅτι ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ μὲν ὑπὸ ΑΕΓ γωνία τῇ other at the point E. I say that angle AEC is equal to
ὑπὸ ΔΕΒ, ἡ δὲ ὑπὸ ΓΕΒ τῇ ὑπὸ ΑΕΔ. (angle) DEB, and (angle) CEB to (angle) AED.
Ε
∆
Α
Β
Γ D
A
E
B
C
᾿Επεὶ γὰρ εὐθεῖα ἡ ΑΕ ἐπ᾿ εὐθεῖαν τὴν ΓΔ ἐφέστηκε For since the straight-line AE stands on the straightγωνίας ποιοῦσα τὰς ὑπὸ ΓΕΑ, ΑΕΔ, αἱ ἄρα ὑπὸ ΓΕΑ, ΑΕΔ line CD, making the angles CEA and AED, the (sum
γωνίαι δυσὶν ὀρθαῖς ἴσαι εἰσίν. πάλιν, ἐπεὶ εὐθεῖα ἡ ΔΕ ἐπ᾿ of the) angles CEA and AED is thus equal to two rightεὐθεῖαν τὴν ΑΒ ἐφέστηκε γωνίας ποιοῦσα τὰς ὑπὸ ΑΕΔ, angles [Prop. 1.13]. Again, since the straight-line DE
ΔΕΒ, αἱ ἄρα ὑπὸ ΑΕΔ, ΔΕΒ γωνίαι δυσὶν ὀρθαῖς ἴσαι εἰσίν. stands on the straight-line AB, making the angles AED
ἐδείχθησαν δὲ καὶ αἱ ὑπὸ ΓΕΑ, ΑΕΔ δυσὶν ὀρθαῖς ἴσαι· αἱ and DEB, the (sum of the) angles AED and DEB is
ἄρα ὑπὸ ΓΕΑ, ΑΕΔ ταῖς ὑπὸ ΑΕΔ, ΔΕΒ ἴσαι εἰσίν. κοινὴ thus equal to two right-angles [Prop. 1.13]. But (the sum
ἀφῃρήσθω ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΕΔ· λοιπὴ ἄρα ἡ ὑπὸ ΓΕΑ λοιπῇ τῇ ὑπὸ of) CEA and AED was also shown (to be) equal to two
ΒΕΔ ἴση ἐστίν· ὁμοίως δὴ δειχθήσεται, ὅτι καὶ αἱ ὑπὸ ΓΕΒ, right-angles. Thus, (the sum of) CEA and AED is equal
ΔΕΑ ἴσαι εἰσίν. to (the sum of) AED and DEB [C.N. 1]. Let AED have
᾿Εὰν ἄρα δύο εὐθεῖαι τέμνωσιν ἀλλήλας, τὰς κατὰ κο- been subtracted from both. Thus, the remainder CEA is
ρυφὴν γωνίας ἴσας ἀλλήλαις ποιοῦσιν· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. equal to the remainder BED [C.N. 3]. Similarly, it can
be shown that CEB and DEA are also equal.
Thus, if two straight-lines cut one another then they
make the vertically opposite angles equal to one another.
(Which is) the very thing it was required to show.
iþ. Proposition 16
Παντὸς τριγώνου μιᾶς τῶν πλευρῶν προσεκβληθείσης For any triangle, when one of the sides is produced,
ἡ ἐκτὸς γωνία ἑκατέρας τῶν ἐντὸς καὶ ἀπεναντίον γωνιῶν the external angle is greater than each of the internal and
μείζων ἐστίν. opposite angles.
῎Εστω τρίγωνον τὸ ΑΒΓ, καὶ προσεκβεβλήσθω αὐτοῦ Let ABC be a triangle, and let one of its sides BC
μία πλευρὰ ἡ ΒΓ ἐπὶ τὸ Δ· λὲγω, ὅτι ἡ ἐκτὸς γωνία ἡ ὑπὸ have been produced to D. I say that the external angle
ΑΓΔ μείζων ἐστὶν ἑκατέρας τῶν ἐντὸς καὶ ἀπεναντίον τῶν ACD is greater than each of the internal and opposite
ὑπὸ ΓΒΑ, ΒΑΓ γωνιῶν. angles, CBA and BAC.
Τετμήσθω ἡ ΑΓ δίχα κατὰ τὸ Ε, καὶ ἐπιζευχθεῖσα ἡ ΒΕ Let the (straight-line) AC have been cut in half at
ἐκβεβλήσθω ἐπ᾿ εὐθείας ἐπὶ τὸ Ζ, καὶ κείσθω τῇ ΒΕ ἴση ἡ (point) E [Prop. 1.10]. And BE being joined, let it have
ΕΖ, καὶ ἐπεζεύχθω ἡ ΖΓ, καὶ διήχθω ἡ ΑΓ ἐπὶ τὸ Η. been produced in a straight-line to (point) F.
† And let
᾿Επεὶ οὖν ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ μὲν ΑΕ τῇ ΕΓ, ἡ δὲ ΒΕ τῇ ΕΖ, δύο EF be made equal to BE [Prop. 1.3], and let FC have
δὴ αἱ ΑΕ, ΕΒ δυσὶ ταῖς ΓΕ, ΕΖ ἴσαι εἰσὶν ἑκατέρα ἑκατέρᾳ· been joined, and let AC have been drawn through to
καὶ γωνία ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΕΒ γωνίᾳ τῇ ὑπὸ ΖΕΓ ἴση ἐστίν· κατὰ (point) G.
κορυφὴν γάρ· βάσις ἄρα ἡ ΑΒ βάσει τῇ ΖΓ ἴση ἐστίν, καὶ τὸ Therefore, since AE is equal to EC, and BE to EF,
ΑΒΕ τρίγωνον τῷ ΖΕΓ τριγώνῳ ἐστὶν ἴσον, καὶ αἱ λοιπαὶ the two (straight-lines) AE, EB are equal to the two
20
STOIQEIWN aþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 1
γωνίαι ταῖς λοιπαῖς γωνίαις ἴσαι εἰσὶν ἑκατέρα ἑκατέρᾳ, ὑφ᾿ (straight-lines) CE, EF, respectively. Also, angle AEB
ἃς αἱ ἴσαι πλευραὶ ὑποτείνουσιν· ἴση ἄρα ἐστὶν ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΑΕ is equal to angle FEC, for (they are) vertically opposite
τῇ ὑπὸ ΕΓΖ. μείζων δέ ἐστιν ἡ ὑπὸ ΕΓΔ τῆς ὑπὸ ΕΓΖ· [Prop. 1.15]. Thus, the base AB is equal to the base FC,
μείζων ἄρα ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΓΔ τῆς ὑπὸ ΒΑΕ. ῾Ομοίως δὴ τῆς ΒΓ and the triangle ABE is equal to the triangle FEC, and
τετμημένης δίχα δειχθήσεται καὶ ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΓΗ, τουτέστιν ἡ the remaining angles subtended by the equal sides are
ὑπὸ ΑΓΔ, μείζων καὶ τῆς ὑπὸ ΑΒΓ. equal to the corresponding remaining angles [Prop. 1.4].
Thus, BAE is equal to ECF. But ECD is greater than
ECF. Thus, ACD is greater than BAE. Similarly, by
having cut BC in half, it can be shown (that) BCG—that
is to say, ACD—(is) also greater than ABC.
Ε
Η
Β ∆
Γ
Α Ζ
E
B
A
C
G
F
D
Παντὸς ἄρα τριγώνου μιᾶς τῶν πλευρῶν προσεκ- Thus, for any triangle, when one of the sides is proβληθείσης ἡ ἐκτὸς γωνία ἑκατέρας τῶν ἐντὸς καὶ ἀπε- duced, the external angle is greater than each of the inναντίον γωνιῶν μείζων ἐστίν· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. ternal and opposite angles. (Which is) the very thing it
was required to show.
† The implicit assumption that the point F lies in the interior of the angle ABC should be counted as an additional postulate.
izþ. Proposition 17
Παντὸvς τριγώνου αἱ δύο γωνίαι δύο ὀρθῶν ἐλάσσονές For any triangle, (the sum of) two angles taken toεἰσι πάντῇ μεταλαμβανόμεναι. gether in any (possible way) is less than two right-angles.
Γ ∆
Α
Β B
A
C D
῎Εστω τρίγωνον τὸ ΑΒΓ· λέγω, ὅτι τοῦ ΑΒΓ τριγώνου Let ABC be a triangle. I say that (the sum of) two
αἱ δύο γωνίαι δύο ὀρθῶν ἐλάττονές εἰσι πάντῃ μεταλαμ- angles of triangle ABC taken together in any (possible
βανόμεναι. way) is less than two right-angles.
21
STOIQEIWN aþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 1
᾿Εκβεβλήσθω γὰρ ἡ ΒΓ ἐπὶ τὸ Δ. For let BC have been produced to D.
Καὶ ἐπεὶ τριγώνου τοῦ ΑΒΓ ἐκτός ἐστι γωνία ἡ ὑπὸ And since the angle ACD is external to triangle ABC,
ΑΓΔ, μείζων ἐστὶ τῆς ἐντὸς καὶ ἀπεναντίον τῆς ὑπὸ ΑΒΓ. it is greater than the internal and opposite angle ABC
κοινὴ προσκείσθω ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΓΒ· αἱ ἄρα ὑπὸ ΑΓΔ, ΑΓΒ τῶν [Prop. 1.16]. Let ACB have been added to both. Thus,
ὑπὸ ΑΒΓ, ΒΓΑ μείζονές εἰσιν. ἀλλ᾿ αἱ ὑπὸ ΑΓΔ, ΑΓΒ the (sum of the angles) ACD and ACB is greater than
δύο ὀρθαῖς ἴσαι εἰσίν· αἱ ἄρα ὑπὸ ΑΒΓ, ΒΓΑ δύο ὀρθῶν the (sum of the angles) ABC and BCA. But, (the sum of)
ἐλάσσονές εἰσιν. ὁμοίως δὴ δείξομεν, ὅτι καὶ αἱ ὑπὸ ΒΑΓ, ACD and ACB is equal to two right-angles [Prop. 1.13].
ΑΓΒ δύο ὀρθῶν ἐλάσσονές εἰσι καὶ ἔτι αἱ ὑπὸ ΓΑΒ, ΑΒΓ. Thus, (the sum of) ABC and BCA is less than two rightΠαντὸvς ἄρα τριγώνου αἱ δύο γωνίαι δύο ὀρθῶν ἐλάσς- angles. Similarly, we can show that (the sum of) BAC
ονές εἰσι πάντῇ μεταλαμβανόμεναι· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. and ACB is also less than two right-angles, and further
(that the sum of) CAB and ABC (is less than two rightangles).
Thus, for any triangle, (the sum of) two angles taken
together in any (possible way) is less than two rightangles. (Which is) the very thing it was required to show.
ihþ. Proposition 18
Παντὸς τριγώνου ἡ μείζων πλευρὰ τὴν μείζονα γωνίαν In any triangle, the greater side subtends the greater
ὑποτείνει. angle.
Β
Γ
Α
∆
A
D
B
C
῎Εστω γὰρ τρίγωνον τὸ ΑΒΓ μείζονα ἔχον τὴν ΑΓ For let ABC be a triangle having side AC greater than
πλευρὰν τῆς ΑΒ· λέγω, ὅτι καὶ γωνία ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΒΓ μείζων AB. I say that angle ABC is also greater than BCA.
ἐστὶ τῆς ὑπὸ ΒΓΑ· For since AC is greater than AB, let AD be made
᾿Επεὶ γὰρ μείζων ἐστὶν ἡ ΑΓ τῆς ΑΒ, κείσθω τῇ ΑΒ ἴση equal to AB [Prop. 1.3], and let BD have been joined.
ἡ ΑΔ, καὶ ἐπεζεύχθω ἡ ΒΔ. And since angle ADB is external to triangle BCD, it
Καὶ ἐπεὶ τριγώνου τοῦ ΒΓΔ ἐκτός ἐστι γωνία ἡ ὑπὸ is greater than the internal and opposite (angle) DCB
ΑΔΒ, μείζων ἐστὶ τῆς ἐντὸς καὶ ἀπεναντίον τῆς ὑπὸ ΔΓΒ· [Prop. 1.16]. But ADB (is) equal to ABD, since side
ἴση δὲ ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΔΒ τῇ ὑπὸ ΑΒΔ, ἐπεὶ καὶ πλευρὰ ἡ ΑΒ τῇ AB is also equal to side AD [Prop. 1.5]. Thus, ABD is
ΑΔ ἐστιν ἴση· μείζων ἄρα καὶ ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΒΔ τῆς ὑπὸ ΑΓΒ· also greater than ACB. Thus, ABC is much greater than
πολλῷ ἄρα ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΒΓ μείζων ἐστὶ τῆς ὑπὸ ΑΓΒ. ACB.
Παντὸς ἄρα τριγώνου ἡ μείζων πλευρὰ τὴν μείζονα Thus, in any triangle, the greater side subtends the
γωνίαν ὑποτείνει· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. greater angle. (Which is) the very thing it was required
to show.
ijþ. Proposition 19
Παντὸς τριγώνου ὑπὸ τὴν μείζονα γωνίαν ἡ μείζων In any triangle, the greater angle is subtended by the
πλευρὰ ὑποτείνει. greater side.
῎Εστω τρίγωνον τὸ ΑΒΓ μείζονα ἔχον τὴν ὑπὸ ΑΒΓ Let ABC be a triangle having the angle ABC greater
γωνίαν τῆς ὑπὸ ΒΓΑ· λέγω, ὅτι καὶ πλευρὰ ἡ ΑΓ πλευρᾶς than BCA. I say that side AC is also greater than side
τῆς ΑΒ μείζων ἐστίν. AB.
22
STOIQEIWN aþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 1
Εἰ γὰρ μή, ἤτοι ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ΑΓ τῇ ΑΒ ἢ ἐλάσσων· ἴση For if not, AC is certainly either equal to, or less than,
μὲν οὖν οὐκ ἔστιν ἡ ΑΓ τῇ ΑΒ· ἴση γὰρ ἂν ἦν καὶ γωνία ἡ AB. In fact, AC is not equal to AB. For then angle ABC
ὑπὸ ΑΒΓ τῇ ὑπὸ ΑΓΒ· οὐκ ἔστι δέ· οὐκ ἄρα ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ΑΓ would also have been equal to ACB [Prop. 1.5]. But it
τῇ ΑΒ. οὐδὲ μὴν ἐλάσσων ἐστὶν ἡ ΑΓ τῆς ΑΒ· ἐλάσσων is not. Thus, AC is not equal to AB. Neither, indeed, is
γὰρ ἂν ἦν καὶ γωνία ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΒΓ τῆς ὑπὸ ΑΓΒ· οὐκ ἔστι AC less than AB. For then angle ABC would also have
δέ· οὐκ ἄρα ἐλάσσων ἐστὶν ἡ ΑΓ τῆς ΑΒ. ἐδείχθη δέ, ὅτι been less than ACB [Prop. 1.18]. But it is not. Thus, AC
οὐδὲ ἴση ἐστίν. μείζων ἄρα ἐστὶν ἡ ΑΓ τῆς ΑΒ. is not less than AB. But it was shown that (AC) is not
equal (to AB) either. Thus, AC is greater than AB.
Β
Α
Γ C
B
A
Παντὸς ἄρα τριγώνου ὑπὸ τὴν μείζονα γωνίαν ἡ μείζων Thus, in any triangle, the greater angle is subtended
πλευρὰ ὑποτείνει· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. by the greater side. (Which is) the very thing it was required to show.
kþ. Proposition 20
Παντὸς τριγώνου αἱ δύο πλευραὶ τῆς λοιπῆς μείζονές In any triangle, (the sum of) two sides taken toεἰσι πάντῃ μεταλαμβανόμεναι. gether in any (possible way) is greater than the remaining
(side).
Β Γ
∆
Α
B
A
D
C
῎Εστω γὰρ τρίγωνον τὸ ΑΒΓ· λέγω, ὅτι τοῦ ΑΒΓ For let ABC be a triangle. I say that in triangle ABC
τριγώνου αἱ δύο πλευραὶ τῆς λοιπῆς μείζονές εἰσι πάντῃ (the sum of) two sides taken together in any (possible
μεταλαμβανόμεναι, αἱ μὲν ΒΑ, ΑΓ τῆς ΒΓ, αἱ δὲ ΑΒ, ΒΓ way) is greater than the remaining (side). (So), (the sum
τῆς ΑΓ, αἱ δὲ ΒΓ, ΓΑ τῆς ΑΒ. of) BA and AC (is greater) than BC, (the sum of) AB
23
STOIQEIWN aþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 1
Διήχθω γὰρ ἡ ΒΑ ἐπὶ τὸ Δ σημεῖον, καὶ κείσθω τῇ ΓΑ and BC than AC, and (the sum of) BC and CA than
ἴση ἡ ΑΔ, καὶ ἐπεζεύχθω ἡ ΔΓ. AB.
᾿Επεὶ οὖν ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ΔΑ τῇ ΑΓ, ἴση ἐστὶ καὶ γωνία For let BA have been drawn through to point D, and
ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΔΓ τῇ ὑπὸ ΑΓΔ· μείζων ἄρα ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΓΔ τῆς ὑπὸ let AD be made equal to CA [Prop. 1.3], and let DC
ΑΔΓ· καὶ ἐπεὶ τρίγωνόν ἐστι τὸ ΔΓΒ μείζονα ἔχον τὴν ὑπὸ have been joined.
ΒΓΔ γωνίαν τῆς ὑπὸ ΒΔΓ, ὑπὸ δὲ τὴν μείζονα γωνίαν ἡ Therefore, since DA is equal to AC, the angle ADC
μείζων πλευρὰ ὑποτείνει, ἡ ΔΒ ἄρα τῆς ΒΓ ἐστι μείζων. ἴση is also equal to ACD [Prop. 1.5]. Thus, BCD is greater
δὲ ἡ ΔΑ τῇ ΑΓ· μείζονες ἄρα αἱ ΒΑ, ΑΓ τῆς ΒΓ· ὁμοίως than ADC. And since DCB is a triangle having the angle
δὴ δείξομεν, ὅτι καὶ αἱ μὲν ΑΒ, ΒΓ τῆς ΓΑ μείζονές εἰσιν, BCD greater than BDC, and the greater angle subtends
αἱ δὲ ΒΓ, ΓΑ τῆς ΑΒ. the greater side [Prop. 1.19], DB is thus greater than
Παντὸς ἄρα τριγώνου αἱ δύο πλευραὶ τῆς λοιπῆς BC. But DA is equal to AC. Thus, (the sum of) BA and
μείζονές εἰσι πάντῃ μεταλαμβανόμεναι· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. AC is greater than BC. Similarly, we can show that (the
sum of) AB and BC is also greater than CA, and (the
sum of) BC and CA than AB.
Thus, in any triangle, (the sum of) two sides taken together in any (possible way) is greater than the remaining
(side). (Which is) the very thing it was required to show.
kaþ. Proposition 21
᾿Εὰν τριγώνου ἐπὶ μιᾶς τῶν πλευρῶν ἀπὸ τῶν περάτων If two internal straight-lines are constructed on one
δύο εὐθεῖαι ἐντὸς συσταθῶσιν, αἱ συσταθεῖσαι τῶν λοιπῶν of the sides of a triangle, from its ends, the constructed
τοῦ τριγώνου δύο πλευρῶν ἐλάττονες μὲν ἔσονται, μείζονα (straight-lines) will be less than the two remaining sides
δὲ γωνίαν περιέξουσιν. of the triangle, but will encompass a greater angle.
Β Γ
Α
∆
Ε
B
A
E
C
D
Τριγώνου γὰρ τοῦ ΑΒΓ ἐπὶ μιᾶς τῶν πλευρῶν τῆς ΒΓ For let the two internal straight-lines BD and DC
ἀπὸ τῶν περάτων τῶν Β, Γ δύο εὐθεῖαι ἐντὸς συνεστάτωσαν have been constructed on one of the sides BC of the triαἱ ΒΔ, ΔΓ· λέγω, ὅτι αἱ ΒΔ, ΔΓ τῶν λοιπῶν τοῦ τριγώνου angle ABC, from its ends B and C (respectively). I say
δύο πλευρῶν τῶν ΒΑ, ΑΓ ἐλάσσονες μέν εἰσιν, μείζονα δὲ that BD and DC are less than the (sum of the) two reγωνίαν περιέχουσι τὴν ὑπὸ ΒΔΓ τῆς ὑπὸ ΒΑΓ. maining sides of the triangle BA and AC, but encompass
Διήχθω γὰρ ἡ ΒΔ ἐπὶ τὸ Ε. καὶ ἐπεὶ παντὸς τριγώνου an angle BDC greater than BAC.
αἱ δύο πλευραὶ τῆς λοιπῆς μείζονές εἰσιν, τοῦ ΑΒΕ ἄρα For let BD have been drawn through to E. And since
τριγώνου αἱ δύο πλευραὶ αἱ ΑΒ, ΑΕ τῆς ΒΕ μείζονές in any triangle (the sum of any) two sides is greater than
εἰσιν· κοινὴ προσκείσθω ἡ ΕΓ· αἱ ἄρα ΒΑ, ΑΓ τῶν ΒΕ, the remaining (side) [Prop. 1.20], in triangle ABE the
ΕΓ μείζονές εἰσιν. πάλιν, ἐπεὶ τοῦ ΓΕΔ τριγώνου αἱ δύο (sum of the) two sides AB and AE is thus greater than
πλευραὶ αἱ ΓΕ, ΕΔ τῆς ΓΔ μείζονές εἰσιν, κοινὴ προσκείσθω BE. Let EC have been added to both. Thus, (the sum
ἡ ΔΒ· αἱ ΓΕ, ΕΒ ἄρα τῶν ΓΔ, ΔΒ μείζονές εἰσιν. ἀλλὰ of) BA and AC is greater than (the sum of) BE and EC.
τῶν ΒΕ, ΕΓ μείζονες ἐδείχθησαν αἱ ΒΑ, ΑΓ· πολλῷ ἄρα αἱ Again, since in triangle CED the (sum of the) two sides
ΒΑ, ΑΓ τῶν ΒΔ, ΔΓ μείζονές εἰσιν. CE and ED is greater than CD, let DB have been added
Πάλιν, ἐπεὶ παντὸς τριγώνου ἡ ἐκτὸς γωνία τῆς ἐντὸς to both. Thus, (the sum of) CE and EB is greater than
καὶ ἀπεναντίον μείζων ἐστίν, τοῦ ΓΔΕ ἄρα τριγώνου ἡ (the sum of) CD and DB. But, (the sum of) BA and
ἐκτὸς γωνία ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΔΓ μείζων ἐστὶ τῆς ὑπὸ ΓΕΔ. διὰ AC was shown (to be) greater than (the sum of) BE and
ταὐτὰ τοίνυν καὶ τοῦ ΑΒΕ τριγώνου ἡ ἐκτὸς γωνία ἡ ὑπὸ EC. Thus, (the sum of) BA and AC is much greater than
24
STOIQEIWN aþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 1
ΓΕΒ μείζων ἐστὶ τῆς ὑπὸ ΒΑΓ. ἀλλὰ τῆς ὑπὸ ΓΕΒ μείζων (the sum of) BD and DC.
ἐδείχθη ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΔΓ· πολλῷ ἄρα ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΔΓ μείζων ἐστὶ Again, since in any triangle the external angle is
τῆς ὑπὸ ΒΑΓ. greater than the internal and opposite (angles) [Prop.
᾿Εὰν ἄρα τριγώνου ἐπὶ μιᾶς τῶν πλευρῶν ἀπὸ τῶν 1.16], in triangle CDE the external angle BDC is thus
περάτων δύο εὐθεῖαι ἐντὸς συσταθῶσιν, αἱ συσταθεῖσαι τῶν greater than CED. Accordingly, for the same (reason),
λοιπῶν τοῦ τριγώνου δύο πλευρῶν ἐλάττονες μέν εἰσιν, the external angle CEB of the triangle ABE is also
μείζονα δὲ γωνίαν περιέχουσιν· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. greater than BAC. But, BDC was shown (to be) greater
than CEB. Thus, BDC is much greater than BAC.
Thus, if two internal straight-lines are constructed on
one of the sides of a triangle, from its ends, the constructed (straight-lines) are less than the two remaining sides of the triangle, but encompass a greater angle.
(Which is) the very thing it was required to show.
kbþ. Proposition 22
᾿Εκ τριῶν εὐθειῶν, αἵ εἰσιν ἴσαι τρισὶ ταῖς δοθείσαις To construct a triangle from three straight-lines which
[εὐθείαις], τρίγωνον συστήσασθαι· δεῖ δὲ τὰς δύο τῆς λοιπῆς are equal to three given [straight-lines]. It is necessary
μείζονας εἶναι πάντῃ μεταλαμβανομένας [διὰ τὸ καὶ παντὸς for (the sum of) two (of the straight-lines) taken together
τριγώνου τὰς δύο πλευρὰς τῆς λοιπῆς μείζονας εἶναι πάντῃ in any (possible way) to be greater than the remaining
μεταλαμβανομένας]. (one), [on account of the (fact that) in any triangle (the
sum of) two sides taken together in any (possible way) is
greater than the remaining (one) [Prop. 1.20] ].
Θ
Β
Α
Γ
Η
Λ
Κ
Ζ
∆ Ε H
A
B
C
D
F
E
K
L
G
῎Εστωσαν αἱ δοθεῖσαι τρεῖς εὐθεῖαι αἱ Α, Β, Γ, ὧν αἱ Let A, B, and C be the three given straight-lines, of
δύο τῆς λοιπῆς μείζονες ἔστωσαν πάντῃ μεταλαμβανόμεναι, which let (the sum of) two taken together in any (possible
αἱ μὲν Α, Β τῆς Γ, αἱ δὲ Α, Γ τῆς Β, καὶ ἔτι αἱ Β, Γ τῆς Α· way) be greater than the remaining (one). (Thus), (the
δεῖ δὴ ἐκ τῶν ἴσων ταῖς Α, Β, Γ τρίγωνον συστήσασθαι. sum of) A and B (is greater) than C, (the sum of) A and
᾿Εκκείσθω τις εὐθεῖα ἡ ΔΕ πεπερασμένη μὲν κατὰ τὸ C than B, and also (the sum of) B and C than A. So
Δ ἄπειρος δὲ κατὰ τὸ Ε, καὶ κείσθω τῇ μὲν Α ἴση ἡ ΔΖ, it is required to construct a triangle from (straight-lines)
τῇ δὲ Β ἴση ἡ ΖΗ, τῇ δὲ Γ ἴση ἡ ΗΘ· καὶ κέντρῳ μὲν τῷ equal to A, B, and C.
Ζ, διαστήματι δὲ τῷ ΖΔ κύκλος γεγράφθω ὁ ΔΚΛ· πάλιν Let some straight-line DE be set out, terminated at D,
κέντρῳ μὲν τῷ Η, διαστήματι δὲ τῷ ΗΘ κύκλος γεγράφθω and infinite in the direction of E. And let DF made equal
ὁ ΚΛΘ, καὶ ἐπεζεύχθωσαν αἱ ΚΖ, ΚΗ· λέγω, ὅτι ἐκ τριῶν to A, and FG equal to B, and GH equal to C [Prop. 1.3].
εὐθειῶν τῶν ἴσων ταῖς Α, Β, Γ τρίγωνον συνέσταται τὸ And let the circle DKL have been drawn with center F
ΚΖΗ. and radius FD. Again, let the circle KLH have been
᾿Επεὶ γὰρ τὸ Ζ σημεῖον κέντρον ἐστὶ τοῦ ΔΚΛ κύκλου, drawn with center G and radius GH. And let KF and
ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ΖΔ τῇ ΖΚ· ἀλλὰ ἡ ΖΔ τῇ Α ἐστιν ἴση. καὶ ἡ KG have been joined. I say that the triangle KFG has
25
STOIQEIWN aþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 1
ΚΖ ἄρα τῇ Α ἐστιν ἴση. πάλιν, ἐπεὶ τὸ Η σημεῖον κέντρον been constructed from three straight-lines equal to A, B,
ἐστὶ τοῦ ΛΚΘ κύκλου, ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ΗΘ τῇ ΗΚ· ἀλλὰ ἡ ΗΘ and C.
τῇ Γ ἐστιν ἴση· καὶ ἡ ΚΗ ἄρα τῇ Γ ἐστιν ἴση. ἐστὶ δὲ καὶ ἡ For since point F is the center of the circle DKL, FD
ΖΗ τῇ Β ἴση· αἱ τρεῖς ἄρα εὐθεῖαι αἱ ΚΖ, ΖΗ, ΗΚ τρισὶ ταῖς is equal to FK. But, FD is equal to A. Thus, KF is also
Α, Β, Γ ἴσαι εἰσίν. equal to A. Again, since point G is the center of the circle
᾿Εκ τριῶν ἄρα εὐθειῶν τῶν ΚΖ, ΖΗ, ΗΚ, αἵ εἰσιν LKH, GH is equal to GK. But, GH is equal to C. Thus,
ἴσαι τρισὶ ταῖς δοθείσαις εὐθείαις ταῖς Α, Β, Γ, τρίγωνον KG is also equal to C. And FG is also equal to B. Thus,
συνέσταται τὸ ΚΖΗ· ὅπερ ἔδει ποιῆσαι. the three straight-lines KF, FG, and GK are equal to A,
B, and C (respectively).
Thus, the triangle KFG has been constructed from
the three straight-lines KF, FG, and GK, which are
equal to the three given straight-lines A, B, and C (respectively). (Which is) the very thing it was required to
do.
kgþ. Proposition 23
Πρὸς τῇ δοθείσῃ εὐθείᾳ καὶ τῷ πρὸς αὐτῇ σημείῳ To construct a rectilinear angle equal to a given rectiτῇ δοθείσῃ γωνίᾳ εὐθυγράμμῳ ἴσην γωνίαν εὐθύγραμμον linear angle at a (given) point on a given straight-line.
συστήσασθαι.
Γ
∆
Ε
Ζ
Α Η Β
C
G A
F
B
E
D
῎Εστω ἡ μὲν δοθεῖσα εὐθεῖα ἡ ΑΒ, τὸ δὲ πρὸς αὐτῇ Let AB be the given straight-line, A the (given) point
σημεῖον τὸ Α, ἡ δὲ δοθεῖσα γωνία εὐθύγραμμος ἡ ὑπὸ ΔΓΕ· on it, and DCE the given rectilinear angle. So it is reδεῖ δὴ πρὸς τῇ δοθείσῃ εὐθείᾳ τῇ ΑΒ καὶ τῷ πρὸς αὐτῇ quired to construct a rectilinear angle equal to the given
σημείῳ τῷ Α τῇ δοθείσῃ γωνίᾳ εὐθυγράμμῳ τῇ ὑπὸ ΔΓΕ rectilinear angle DCE at the (given) point A on the given
ἴσην γωνίαν εὐθύγραμμον συστήσασθαι. straight-line AB.
Εἰλήφθω ἐφ᾿ ἑκατέρας τῶν ΓΔ, ΓΕ τυχόντα σημεῖα τὰ Let the points D and E have been taken at random
Δ, Ε, καὶ ἐπεζεύχθω ἡ ΔΕ· καὶ ἐκ τριῶν εὐθειῶν, αἵ εἰσιν on each of the (straight-lines) CD and CE (respectively),
ἴσαι τρισὶ ταῖς ΓΔ, ΔΕ, ΓΕ, τρίγωνον συνεστάτω τὸ ΑΖΗ, and let DE have been joined. And let the triangle AFG
ὥστε ἴσην εἶναι τὴν μὲν ΓΔ τῇ ΑΖ, τὴν δὲ ΓΕ τῇ ΑΗ, καὶ have been constructed from three straight-lines which are
ἔτι τὴν ΔΕ τῇ ΖΗ. equal to CD, DE, and CE, such that CD is equal to AF,
᾿Επεὶ οὖν δύο αἱ ΔΓ, ΓΕ δύο ταῖς ΖΑ, ΑΗ ἴσαι εἰσὶν CE to AG, and further DE to FG [Prop. 1.22].
ἑκατέρα ἑκατέρᾳ, καὶ βάσις ἡ ΔΕ βάσει τῇ ΖΗ ἴση, γωνία Therefore, since the two (straight-lines) DC, CE are
ἄρα ἡ ὑπὸ ΔΓΕ γωνίᾳ τῇ ὑπὸ ΖΑΗ ἐστιν ἴση. equal to the two (straight-lines) FA, AG, respectively,
Πρὸς ἄρα τῇ δοθείσῃ εὐθείᾳ τῇ ΑΒ καὶ τῷ πρὸς αὐτῇ and the base DE is equal to the base FG, the angle DCE
σημείῳ τῷ Α τῇ δοθείσῃ γωνίᾳ εὐθυγράμμῳ τῇ ὑπὸ ΔΓΕ is thus equal to the angle FAG [Prop. 1.8].
ἴση γωνία εὐθύγραμμος συνέσταται ἡ ὑπὸ ΖΑΗ· ὅπερ ἔδει Thus, the rectilinear angle FAG, equal to the given
ποιῆσαι. rectilinear angle DCE, has been constructed at the
(given) point A on the given straight-line AB. (Which
26
STOIQEIWN aþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 1
is) the very thing it was required to do.
kdþ. Proposition 24
᾿Εὰν δύο τρίγωνα τὰς δύο πλευρὰς [ταῖς] δύο πλευραῖς If two triangles have two sides equal to two sides, reἴσας ἔχῃ ἑκατέραν ἑκατέρᾳ, τὴν δὲ γωνίαν τῆς γωνίας spectively, but (one) has the angle encompassed by the
μείζονα ἔχῃ τὴν ὑπὸ τῶν ἴσων εὐθειῶν περιεχομένην, καὶ equal straight-lines greater than the (corresponding) anτὴν βάσιν τῆς βάσεως μείζονα ἕξει. gle (in the other), then (the former triangle) will also
have a base greater than the base (of the latter).
Ε
Γ
Β
Α ∆
Η Ζ F
A
C
B
D
E
G
῎Εστω δύο τρίγωνα τὰ ΑΒΓ, ΔΕΖ τὰς δύο πλευρὰς Let ABC and DEF be two triangles having the two
τὰς ΑΒ, ΑΓ ταῖς δύο πλευραῖς ταῖς ΔΕ, ΔΖ ἴσας ἔχοντα sides AB and AC equal to the two sides DE and DF,
ἑκατέραν ἑκατέρᾳ, τὴν μὲν ΑΒ τῇ ΔΕ τὴν δὲ ΑΓ τῇ ΔΖ, ἡ respectively. (That is), AB (equal) to DE, and AC to
δὲ πρὸς τῷ Α γωνία τῆς πρὸς τῷ Δ γωνίας μείζων ἔστω· DF. Let them also have the angle at A greater than the
λέγω, ὅτι καὶ βάσις ἡ ΒΓ βάσεως τῆς ΕΖ μείζων ἐστίν. angle at D. I say that the base BC is also greater than
᾿Επεὶ γὰρ μείζων ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΑΓ γωνία τῆς ὑπὸ ΕΔΖ the base EF.
γωνίας, συνεστάτω πρὸς τῇ ΔΕ εὐθείᾳ καὶ τῷ πρὸς αὐτῇ For since angle BAC is greater than angle EDF,
σημείῳ τῷ Δ τῇ ὑπὸ ΒΑΓ γωνίᾳ ἴση ἡ ὑπὸ ΕΔΗ, καὶ κείσθω let (angle) EDG, equal to angle BAC, have been
ὁποτέρᾳ τῶν ΑΓ, ΔΖ ἴση ἡ ΔΗ, καὶ ἐπεζεύχθωσαν αἱ ΕΗ, constructed at the point D on the straight-line DE
ΖΗ. [Prop. 1.23]. And let DG be made equal to either of
᾿Επεὶ οὖν ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ μὲν ΑΒ τῇ ΔΕ, ἡ δὲ ΑΓ τῇ ΔΗ, AC or DF [Prop. 1.3], and let EG and FG have been
δύο δὴ αἱ ΒΑ, ΑΓ δυσὶ ταῖς ΕΔ, ΔΗ ἴσαι εἰσὶν ἑκατέρα joined.
ἑκατέρᾳ· καὶ γωνία ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΑΓ γωνίᾳ τῇ ὑπὸ ΕΔΗ ἴση· Therefore, since AB is equal to DE and AC to DG,
βάσις ἄρα ἡ ΒΓ βάσει τῇ ΕΗ ἐστιν ἴση. πάλιν, ἐπεὶ ἴση the two (straight-lines) BA, AC are equal to the two
ἐστὶν ἡ ΔΖ τῇ ΔΗ, ἴση ἐστὶ καὶ ἡ ὑπὸ ΔΗΖ γωνία τῇ ὑπὸ (straight-lines) ED, DG, respectively. Also the angle
ΔΖΗ· μείζων ἄρα ἡ ὑπὸ ΔΖΗ τῆς ὑπὸ ΕΗΖ· πολλῷ ἄρα BAC is equal to the angle EDG. Thus, the base BC
μείζων ἐστὶν ἡ ὑπὸ ΕΖΗ τῆς ὑπὸ ΕΗΖ. καὶ ἐπεὶ τρίγωνόν is equal to the base EG [Prop. 1.4]. Again, since DF
ἐστι τὸ ΕΖΗ μείζονα ἔχον τὴν ὑπὸ ΕΖΗ γωνίαν τῆς ὑπὸ is equal to DG, angle DGF is also equal to angle DFG
ΕΗΖ, ὑπὸ δὲ τὴν μείζονα γωνίαν ἡ μείζων πλευρὰ ὑποτείνει, [Prop. 1.5]. Thus, DFG (is) greater than EGF. Thus,
μείζων ἄρα καὶ πλευρὰ ἡ ΕΗ τῆς ΕΖ. ἴση δὲ ἡ ΕΗ τῇ ΒΓ· EFG is much greater than EGF. And since triangle
μείζων ἄρα καὶ ἡ ΒΓ τῆς ΕΖ. EFG has angle EFG greater than EGF, and the greater
᾿Εὰν ἄρα δύο τρίγωνα τὰς δύο πλευρὰς δυσὶ πλευραῖς angle is subtended by the greater side [Prop. 1.19], side
ἴσας ἔχῃ ἑκατέραν ἑκατέρᾳ, τὴν δὲ γωνίαν τῆς γωνίας EG (is) thus also greater than EF. But EG (is) equal to
μείζονα ἔχῃ τὴν ὑπὸ τῶν ἴσων εὐθειῶν περιεχομένην, καὶ BC. Thus, BC (is) also greater than EF.
τὴν βάσιν τῆς βάσεως μείζονα ἕξει· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. Thus, if two triangles have two sides equal to two
sides, respectively, but (one) has the angle encompassed
by the equal straight-lines greater than the (corresponding) angle (in the other), then (the former triangle) will
also have a base greater than the base (of the latter).
27
STOIQEIWN aþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 1
(Which is) the very thing it was required to show.
keþ. Proposition 25
᾿Εὰν δύο τρίγωνα τὰς δύο πλευρὰς δυσὶ πλευραῖς ἴσας If two triangles have two sides equal to two sides,
ἔχῃ ἑκατέραν ἑκατέρᾳ, τὴν δὲ βάσιν τῆς βάσεως μείζονα respectively, but (one) has a base greater than the base
ἔχῃ, καὶ τὴν γωνίαν τῆς γωνίας μείζονα ἕξει τὴν ὑπὸ τῶν (of the other), then (the former triangle) will also have
ἴσων εὐθειῶν περιεχομένην. the angle encompassed by the equal straight-lines greater
than the (corresponding) angle (in the latter).
∆
Β
Ε Ζ
Α
Γ
F
B
A
C
D
E
῎Εστω δύο τρίγωνα τὰ ΑΒΓ, ΔΕΖ τὰς δύο πλευρὰς Let ABC and DEF be two triangles having the two
τὰς ΑΒ, ΑΓ ταῖς δύο πλευραῖς ταῖς ΔΕ, ΔΖ ἴσας ἔχοντα sides AB and AC equal to the two sides DE and DF,
ἑκατέραν ἑκατέρᾳ, τὴν μὲν ΑΒ τῇ ΔΕ, τὴν δὲ ΑΓ τῇ ΔΖ· respectively (That is), AB (equal) to DE, and AC to DF.
βάσις δὲ ἡ ΒΓ βάσεως τῆς ΕΖ μείζων ἔστω· λέγω, ὅτι καὶ And let the base BC be greater than the base EF. I say
γωνία ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΑΓ γωνίας τῆς ὑπὸ ΕΔΖ μείζων ἐστίν. that angle BAC is also greater than EDF.
Εἰ γὰρ μή, ἤτοι ἴση ἐστὶν αὐτῇ ἢ ἐλάσσων· ἴση μὲν οὖν For if not, (BAC) is certainly either equal to, or less
οὐκ ἔστιν ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΑΓ τῇ ὑπὸ ΕΔΖ· ἴση γὰρ ἂν ἦν καὶ βάσις than, (EDF). In fact, BAC is not equal to EDF. For
ἡ ΒΓ βάσει τῇ ΕΖ· οὐκ ἔστι δέ. οὐκ ἄρα ἴση ἐστὶ γωνία ἡ then the base BC would also have been equal to the base
ὑπὸ ΒΑΓ τῇ ὑπὸ ΕΔΖ· οὐδὲ μὴν ἐλάσσων ἐστὶν ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΑΓ EF [Prop. 1.4]. But it is not. Thus, angle BAC is not
τῆς ὑπὸ ΕΔΖ· ἐλάσσων γὰρ ἂν ἦν καὶ βάσις ἡ ΒΓ βάσεως equal to EDF. Neither, indeed, is BAC less than EDF.
τῆς ΕΖ· οὐκ ἔστι δέ· οὐκ ἄρα ἐλάσσων ἐστὶν ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΑΓ For then the base BC would also have been less than the
γωνία τῆς ὑπὸ ΕΔΖ. ἐδείχθη δέ, ὅτι οὐδὲ ἴση· μείζων ἄρα base EF [Prop. 1.24]. But it is not. Thus, angle BAC is
ἐστὶν ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΑΓ τῆς ὑπὸ ΕΔΖ. not less than EDF. But it was shown that (BAC is) not
᾿Εὰν ἄρα δύο τρίγωνα τὰς δύο πλευρὰς δυσὶ πλευραῖς equal (to EDF) either. Thus, BAC is greater than EDF.
ἴσας ἔχῃ ἑκατέραν ἑκάτερᾳ, τὴν δὲ βασίν τῆς βάσεως Thus, if two triangles have two sides equal to two
μείζονα ἔχῃ, καὶ τὴν γωνίαν τῆς γωνίας μείζονα ἕξει τὴν sides, respectively, but (one) has a base greater than the
ὑπὸ τῶν ἴσων εὐθειῶν περιεχομένην· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. base (of the other), then (the former triangle) will also
have the angle encompassed by the equal straight-lines
greater than the (corresponding) angle (in the latter).
(Which is) the very thing it was required to show.
kþ. Proposition 26
᾿Εὰν δύο τρίγωνα τὰς δύο γωνίας δυσὶ γωνίαις ἴσας ἔχῃ If two triangles have two angles equal to two angles,
ἑκατέραν ἑκατέρᾳ καὶ μίαν πλευρὰν μιᾷ πλευρᾷ ἴσην ἤτοι τὴν respectively, and one side equal to one side—in fact, eiπρὸς ταῖς ἴσαις γωνίαις ἢ τὴν ὑποτείνουσαν ὑπὸ μίαν τῶν ther that by the equal angles, or that subtending one of
ἴσων γωνιῶν, καὶ τὰς λοιπὰς πλευρὰς ταῖς λοιπαῖς πλευραῖς the equal angles—then (the triangles) will also have the
ἴσας ἕξει [ἑκατέραν ἑκατέρᾳ] καὶ τὴν λοιπὴν γωνίαν τῇ λοιπῇ remaining sides equal to the [corresponding] remaining
γωνίᾳ. sides, and the remaining angle (equal) to the remaining
῎Εστω δύο τρίγωνα τὰ ΑΒΓ, ΔΕΖ τὰς δύο γωνίας τὰς angle.
28
STOIQEIWN aþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 1
ὑπὸ ΑΒΓ, ΒΓΑ δυσὶ ταῖς ὑπὸ ΔΕΖ, ΕΖΔ ἴσας ἔχοντα Let ABC and DEF be two triangles having the two
ἑκατέραν ἑκατέρᾳ, τὴν μὲν ὑπὸ ΑΒΓ τῇ ὑπὸ ΔΕΖ, τὴν angles ABC and BCA equal to the two (angles) DEF
δὲ ὑπὸ ΒΓΑ τῇ ὑπὸ ΕΖΔ· ἐχέτω δὲ καὶ μίαν πλευρὰν μιᾷ and EFD, respectively. (That is) ABC (equal) to DEF,
πλευρᾷ ἴσην, πρότερον τὴν πρὸς ταῖς ἴσαις γωνίαις τὴν and BCA to EFD. And let them also have one side equal
ΒΓ τῇ ΕΖ· λέγω, ὅτι καὶ τὰς λοιπὰς πλευρὰς ταῖς λοιπαῖς to one side. First of all, the (side) by the equal angles.
πλευραῖς ἴσας ἕξει ἑκατέραν ἑκατέρᾳ, τὴν μὲν ΑΒ τῇ ΔΕ (That is) BC (equal) to EF. I say that they will have
τὴν δὲ ΑΓ τῇ ΔΖ, καὶ τὴν λοιπὴν γωνίαν τῇ λοιπῇ γωνίᾳ, the remaining sides equal to the corresponding remainτὴν ὑπὸ ΒΑΓ τῇ ὑπὸ ΕΔΖ. ing sides. (That is) AB (equal) to DE, and AC to DF.
And (they will have) the remaining angle (equal) to the
remaining angle. (That is) BAC (equal) to EDF.
∆
Α
Β
Η
Θ Γ
Ε Ζ
A
G
B H C
D
E F
Εἰ γὰρ ἄνισός ἐστιν ἡ ΑΒ τῇ ΔΕ, μία αὐτῶν μείζων For if AB is unequal to DE then one of them is
ἐστίν. ἔστω μείζων ἡ ΑΒ, καὶ κείσθω τῇ ΔΕ ἴση ἡ ΒΗ, καὶ greater. Let AB be greater, and let BG be made equal
ἐπεζεύχθω ἡ ΗΓ. to DE [Prop. 1.3], and let GC have been joined.
᾿Επεὶ οὖν ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ μὲν ΒΗ τῇ ΔΕ, ἡ δὲ ΒΓ τῇ ΕΖ, δύο Therefore, since BG is equal to DE, and BC to EF,
δὴ αἱ ΒΗ, ΒΓ δυσὶ ταῖς ΔΕ, ΕΖ ἴσαι εἰσὶν ἑκατέρα ἑκατέρᾳ· the two (straight-lines) GB, BC† are equal to the two
καὶ γωνία ἡ ὑπὸ ΗΒΓ γωνίᾳ τῇ ὑπὸ ΔΕΖ ἴση ἐστίν· βάσις (straight-lines) DE, EF, respectively. And angle GBC is
ἄρα ἡ ΗΓ βάσει τῇ ΔΖ ἴση ἐστίν, καὶ τὸ ΗΒΓ τρίγωνον τῷ equal to angle DEF. Thus, the base GC is equal to the
ΔΕΖ τριγώνῳ ἴσον ἐστίν, καὶ αἱ λοιπαὶ γωνίαι ταῖς λοιπαῖς base DF, and triangle GBC is equal to triangle DEF,
γωνίαις ἴσαι ἔσονται, ὑφ᾿ ἃς αἱ ἴσαι πλευραὶ ὑποτείνουσιν· and the remaining angles subtended by the equal sides
ἴση ἄρα ἡ ὑπὸ ΗΓΒ γωνία τῇ ὑπὸ ΔΖΕ. ἀλλὰ ἡ ὑπὸ ΔΖΕ will be equal to the (corresponding) remaining angles
τῇ ὑπὸ ΒΓΑ ὑπόκειται ἴση· καὶ ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΓΗ ἄρα τῇ ὑπὸ ΒΓΑ [Prop. 1.4]. Thus, GCB (is equal) to DFE. But, DFE
ἴση ἐστίν, ἡ ἐλάσσων τῇ μείζονι· ὅπερ ἀδύνατον. οὐκ ἄρα was assumed (to be) equal to BCA. Thus, BCG is also
ἄνισός ἐστιν ἡ ΑΒ τῇ ΔΕ. ἴση ἄρα. ἔστι δὲ καὶ ἡ ΒΓ τῇ ΕΖ equal to BCA, the lesser to the greater. The very thing
ἴση· δύο δὴ αἱ ΑΒ, ΒΓ δυσὶ ταῖς ΔΕ, ΕΖ ἴσαι εἰσὶν ἑκατέρα (is) impossible. Thus, AB is not unequal to DE. Thus,
ἑκατέρᾳ· καὶ γωνία ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΒΓ γωνίᾳ τῇ ὑπὸ ΔΕΖ ἐστιν (it is) equal. And BC is also equal to EF. So the two
ἴση· βάσις ἄρα ἡ ΑΓ βάσει τῇ ΔΖ ἴση ἐστίν, καὶ λοιπὴ γωνία (straight-lines) AB, BC are equal to the two (straightἡ ὑπὸ ΒΑΓ τῇ λοιπῇ γωνίᾳ τῇ ὑπὸ ΕΔΖ ἴση ἐστίν. lines) DE, EF, respectively. And angle ABC is equal to
᾿Αλλὰ δὴ πάλιν ἔστωσαν αἱ ὑπὸ τὰς ἴσας γωνίας πλευραὶ angle DEF. Thus, the base AC is equal to the base DF,
ὑποτείνουσαι ἴσαι, ὡς ἡ ΑΒ τῇ ΔΕ· λέγω πάλιν, ὅτι καὶ αἱ and the remaining angle BAC is equal to the remaining
λοιπαὶ πλευραὶ ταῖς λοιπαῖς πλευραῖς ἴσαι ἔσονται, ἡ μὲν ΑΓ angle EDF [Prop. 1.4].
τῇ ΔΖ, ἡ δὲ ΒΓ τῇ ΕΖ καὶ ἔτι ἡ λοιπὴ γωνία ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΑΓ But, again, let the sides subtending the equal angles
τῇ λοιπῇ γωνίᾳ τῇ ὑπὸ ΕΔΖ ἴση ἐστίν. be equal: for instance, (let) AB (be equal) to DE. Again,
Εἰ γὰρ ἄνισός ἐστιν ἡ ΒΓ τῇ ΕΖ, μία αὐτῶν μείζων ἐστίν. I say that the remaining sides will be equal to the remainἔστω μείζων, εἰ δυνατόν, ἡ ΒΓ, καὶ κείσθω τῇ ΕΖ ἴση ἡ ΒΘ, ing sides. (That is) AC (equal) to DF, and BC to EF.
καὶ ἐπεζεύχθω ἡ ΑΘ. καὶ ἐπὲι ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ μὲν ΒΘ τῇ ΕΖ Furthermore, the remaining angle BAC is equal to the
ἡ δὲ ΑΒ τῇ ΔΕ, δύο δὴ αἱ ΑΒ, ΒΘ δυσὶ ταῖς ΔΕ, ΕΖ ἴσαι remaining angle EDF.
εἰσὶν ἑκατέρα ἑκαρέρᾳ· καὶ γωνίας ἴσας περιέχουσιν· βάσις For if BC is unequal to EF then one of them is
ἄρα ἡ ΑΘ βάσει τῇ ΔΖ ἴση ἐστίν, καὶ τὸ ΑΒΘ τρίγωνον τῷ greater. If possible, let BC be greater. And let BH be
ΔΕΖ τριγώνῳ ἴσον ἐστίν, καὶ αἱ λοιπαὶ γωνίαι ταῖς λοιπαῖς made equal to EF [Prop. 1.3], and let AH have been
γωνίαις ἴσαι ἔσονται, ὑφ᾿ ἃς αἱ ἴσας πλευραὶ ὑποτείνουσιν· joined. And since BH is equal to EF, and AB to DE,
ἴση ἄρα ἐστὶν ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΘΑ γωνία τῇ ὑπὸ ΕΖΔ. ἀλλὰ ἡ ὑπὸ the two (straight-lines) AB, BH are equal to the two
29
STOIQEIWN aþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 1
ΕΖΔ τῇ ὑπὸ ΒΓΑ ἐστιν ἴση· τριγώνου δὴ τοῦ ΑΘΓ ἡ ἐκτὸς (straight-lines) DE, EF, respectively. And the angles
γωνία ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΘΑ ἴση ἐστὶ τῇ ἐντὸς καὶ ἀπεναντίον τῇ ὑπὸ they encompass (are also equal). Thus, the base AH is
ΒΓΑ· ὅπερ ἀδύνατον. οὐκ ἄρα ἄνισός ἐστιν ἡ ΒΓ τῇ ΕΖ· ἴση equal to the base DF, and the triangle ABH is equal to
ἄρα. ἐστὶ δὲ καὶ ἡ ΑΒ τῇ ΔΕ ἴση. δύο δὴ αἱ ΑΒ, ΒΓ δύο the triangle DEF, and the remaining angles subtended
ταῖς ΔΕ, ΕΖ ἴσαι εἰσὶν ἑκατέρα ἑκατέρᾳ· καὶ γωνίας ἴσας by the equal sides will be equal to the (corresponding)
περιέχουσι· βάσις ἄρα ἡ ΑΓ βάσει τῇ ΔΖ ἴση ἐστίν, καὶ τὸ remaining angles [Prop. 1.4]. Thus, angle BHA is equal
ΑΒΓ τρίγωνον τῷ ΔΕΖ τριγώνῳ ἴσον καὶ λοιπὴ γωνία ἡ to EFD. But, EFD is equal to BCA. So, in triangle
ὑπὸ ΒΑΓ τῇ λοιπῂ γωνίᾳ τῇ ὑπὸ ΕΔΖ ἴση. AHC, the external angle BHA is equal to the internal
᾿Εὰν ἄρα δύο τρίγωνα τὰς δύο γωνίας δυσὶ γωνίαις ἴσας and opposite angle BCA. The very thing (is) impossiἔχῃ ἑκατέραν ἑκατέρᾳ καὶ μίαν πλευρὰν μιᾷ πλευρᾷ ἴσην ble [Prop. 1.16]. Thus, BC is not unequal to EF. Thus,
ἤτοι τὴν πρὸς ταῖς ἴσαις γωνίαις, ἢ τὴν ὑποτείνουσαν ὑπὸ (it is) equal. And AB is also equal to DE. So the two
μίαν τῶν ἴσων γωνιῶν, καὶ τὰς λοιπὰς πλευρὰς ταῖς λοιπαῖς (straight-lines) AB, BC are equal to the two (straightπλευραῖς ἴσας ἕξει καὶ τὴν λοιπὴν γωνίαν τῇ λοιπῇ γωνίᾳ· lines) DE, EF, respectively. And they encompass equal
ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. angles. Thus, the base AC is equal to the base DF, and
triangle ABC (is) equal to triangle DEF, and the remaining angle BAC (is) equal to the remaining angle
EDF [Prop. 1.4].
Thus, if two triangles have two angles equal to two
angles, respectively, and one side equal to one side—in
fact, either that by the equal angles, or that subtending
one of the equal angles—then (the triangles) will also
have the remaining sides equal to the (corresponding) remaining sides, and the remaining angle (equal) to the remaining angle. (Which is) the very thing it was required
to show.
† The Greek text has “BG, BC”, which is obviously a mistake.
kzþ. Proposition 27
᾿Εὰν εἰς δύο εὐθείας εὐθεῖα ἐμπίπτουσα τὰς ἐναλλὰξ If a straight-line falling across two straight-lines
γωνίας ἴσας ἀλλήλαις ποιῇ, παράλληλοι ἔσονται ἀλλήλαις αἱ makes the alternate angles equal to one another then
εὐθεῖαι. the (two) straight-lines will be parallel to one another.
Γ Ζ
Α Ε Β
∆
Η
F
A
C
E B
G
D
Εἰς γὰρ δύο εὐθείας τὰς ΑΒ, ΓΔ εὐθεῖα ἐμπίπτουσα ἡ For let the straight-line EF, falling across the two
ΕΖ τὰς ἐναλλὰξ γωνίας τὰς ὑπὸ ΑΕΖ, ΕΖΔ ἴσας ἀλλήλαις straight-lines AB and CD, make the alternate angles
ποιείτω· λέγω, ὅτι παράλληλός ἐστιν ἡ ΑΒ τῇ ΓΔ. AEF and EFD equal to one another. I say that AB and
Εἰ γὰρ μή, ἐκβαλλόμεναι αἱ ΑΒ, ΓΔ συμπεσοῦνται ἤτοι CD are parallel.
ἐπὶ τὰ Β, Δ μέρη ἢ ἐπὶ τὰ Α, Γ. ἐκβεβλήσθωσαν καὶ συμ- For if not, being produced, AB and CD will certainly
πιπτέτωσαν ἐπὶ τὰ Β, Δ μέρη κατὰ τὸ Η. τριγώνου δὴ τοῦ meet together: either in the direction of B and D, or (in
ΗΕΖ ἡ ἐκτὸς γωνία ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΕΖ ἴση ἐστὶ τῇ ἐντὸς καὶ ἀπε- the direction) of A and C [Def. 1.23]. Let them have
ναντίον τῇ ὑπὸ ΕΖΗ· ὅπερ ἐστὶν ἀδύνατον· οὐκ ἄρα αἱ ΑΒ, been produced, and let them meet together in the diΔΓ ἐκβαλλόμεναι συμπεσοῦνται ἐπὶ τὰ Β, Δ μέρη. ὁμοίως rection of B and D at (point) G. So, for the triangle
30
STOIQEIWN aþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 1
δὴ δειχθήσεται, ὅτι οὐδὲ ἐπὶ τὰ Α, Γ· αἱ δὲ ἐπὶ μηδέτερα τὰ GEF, the external angle AEF is equal to the interior
μέρη συμπίπτουσαι παράλληλοί εἰσιν· παράλληλος ἄρα ἐστὶν and opposite (angle) EFG. The very thing is impossible
ἡ ΑΒ τῇ ΓΔ. [Prop. 1.16]. Thus, being produced, AB and CD will not
᾿Εὰν ἄρα εἰς δύο εὐθείας εὐθεῖα ἐμπίπτουσα τὰς ἐναλλὰξ meet together in the direction of B and D. Similarly, it
γωνίας ἴσας ἀλλήλαις ποιῇ, παράλληλοι ἔσονται αἱ εὐθεῖαι· can be shown that neither (will they meet together) in
ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. (the direction of) A and C. But (straight-lines) meeting
in neither direction are parallel [Def. 1.23]. Thus, AB
and CD are parallel.
Thus, if a straight-line falling across two straight-lines
makes the alternate angles equal to one another then
the (two) straight-lines will be parallel (to one another).
(Which is) the very thing it was required to show.
khþ. Proposition 28
᾿Εὰν εἰς δύο εὐθείας εὐθεῖα ἐμπίπτουσα τὴν ἐκτὸς If a straight-line falling across two straight-lines
γωνίαν τῇ ἐντὸς καὶ ἀπεναντίον καὶ ἐπὶ τὰ αὐτὰ μέρη ἴσην makes the external angle equal to the internal and oppoποιῇ ἢ τὰς ἐντὸς καὶ ἐπὶ τὰ αὐτὰ μέρη δυσὶν ὀρθαῖς ἴσας, site angle on the same side, or (makes) the (sum of the)
παράλληλοι ἔσονται ἀλλήλαις αἱ εὐθεῖαι. internal (angles) on the same side equal to two rightangles, then the (two) straight-lines will be parallel to
one another.
Ζ
Α Β
Γ ∆ Θ
Η
Ε
F
A
C
E
G B
H D
Εἰς γὰρ δύο εὐθείας τὰς ΑΒ, ΓΔ εὐθεῖα ἐμπίπτουσα ἡ For let EF, falling across the two straight-lines AB
ΕΖ τὴν ἐκτὸς γωνίαν τὴν ὑπὸ ΕΗΒ τῇ ἐντὸς καὶ ἀπεναντίον and CD, make the external angle EGB equal to the inγωνίᾳ τῇ ὑπὸ ΗΘΔ ἴσην ποιείτω ἢ τὰς ἐντὸς καὶ ἐπὶ τὰ ternal and opposite angle GHD, or the (sum of the) inαὐτὰ μέρη τὰς ὑπὸ ΒΗΘ, ΗΘΔ δυσὶν ὀρθαῖς ἴσας· λέγω, ternal (angles) on the same side, BGH and GHD, equal
ὅτι παράλληλός ἐστιν ἡ ΑΒ τῇ ΓΔ. to two right-angles. I say that AB is parallel to CD.
᾿Επεὶ γὰρ ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ὑπὸ ΕΗΒ τῇ ὑπὸ ΗΘΔ, ἀλλὰ ἡ ὑπὸ For since (in the first case) EGB is equal to GHD, but
ΕΗΒ τῇ ὑπὸ ΑΗΘ ἐστιν ἴση, καὶ ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΗΘ ἄρα τῇ ὑπὸ EGB is equal to AGH [Prop. 1.15], AGH is thus also
ΗΘΔ ἐστιν ἴση· καί εἰσιν ἐναλλάξ· παράλληλος ἄρα ἐστὶν ἡ equal to GHD. And they are alternate (angles). Thus,
ΑΒ τῇ ΓΔ. AB is parallel to CD [Prop. 1.27].
Πάλιν, ἐπεὶ αἱ ὑπὸ ΒΗΘ, ΗΘΔ δύο ὀρθαῖς ἴσαι εἰσίν, Again, since (in the second case, the sum of) BGH
εἰσὶ δὲ καὶ αἱ ὑπὸ ΑΗΘ, ΒΗΘ δυσὶν ὀρθαῖς ἴσαι, αἱ ἄρα and GHD is equal to two right-angles, and (the sum
ὑπὸ ΑΗΘ, ΒΗΘ ταῖς ὑπὸ ΒΗΘ, ΗΘΔ ἴσαι εἰσίν· κοινὴ of) AGH and BGH is also equal to two right-angles
ἀφῃρήσθω ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΗΘ· λοιπὴ ἄρα ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΗΘ λοιπῇ τῇ [Prop. 1.13], (the sum of) AGH and BGH is thus equal
ὑπὸ ΗΘΔ ἐστιν ἴση· καί εἰσιν ἐναλλάξ· παράλληλος ἄρα to (the sum of) BGH and GHD. Let BGH have been
ἐστὶν ἡ ΑΒ τῇ ΓΔ. subtracted from both. Thus, the remainder AGH is equal
᾿Εὰν ἄρα εἰς δύο εὐθείας εὐθεῖα ἐμπίπτουσα τὴν ἐκτὸς to the remainder GHD. And they are alternate (angles).
γωνίαν τῇ ἐντὸς καὶ ἀπεναντίον καὶ ἐπὶ τὰ αὐτὰ μέρη ἴσην Thus, AB is parallel to CD [Prop. 1.27].
31
STOIQEIWN aþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 1
ποιῇ ἢ τὰς ἐντὸς καὶ ἐπὶ τὰ αὐτὰ μέρη δυσὶν ὀρθαῖς ἴσας, Thus, if a straight-line falling across two straight-lines
παράλληλοι ἔσονται αἱ εὐθεῖαι· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. makes the external angle equal to the internal and opposite angle on the same side, or (makes) the (sum of the)
internal (angles) on the same side equal to two rightangles, then the (two) straight-lines will be parallel (to
one another). (Which is) the very thing it was required
to show.
kjþ. Proposition 29
῾Η εἰς τὰς παραλλήλους εὐθείας εὐθεῖα ἐμπίπτουσα τάς A straight-line falling across parallel straight-lines
τε ἐναλλὰξ γωνίας ἴσας ἀλλήλαις ποιεῖ καὶ τὴν ἐκτὸς τῇ makes the alternate angles equal to one another, the exἐντὸς καὶ ἀπεναντίον ἴσην καὶ τὰς ἐντὸς καὶ ἐπὶ τὰ αὐτὰ ternal (angle) equal to the internal and opposite (angle),
μέρη δυσὶν ὀρθαῖς ἴσας. and the (sum of the) internal (angles) on the same side
equal to two right-angles.
Ζ
Α Β
Γ ∆ Θ
Η
Ε
F
A
C
E
G B
H D
Εἰς γὰρ παραλλήλους εὐθείας τὰς ΑΒ, ΓΔ εὐθεῖα For let the straight-line EF fall across the parallel
ἐμπιπτέτω ἡ ΕΖ· λέγω, ὅτι τὰς ἐναλλὰξ γωνίας τὰς ὑπὸ straight-lines AB and CD. I say that it makes the alterΑΗΘ, ΗΘΔ ἴσας ποιεῖ καὶ τὴν ἐκτὸς γωνίαν τὴν ὑπὸ ΕΗΒ nate angles, AGH and GHD, equal, the external angle
τῇ ἐντὸς καὶ ἀπεναντίον τῇ ὑπὸ ΗΘΔ ἴσην καὶ τὰς ἐντὸς EGB equal to the internal and opposite (angle) GHD,
καὶ ἐπὶ τὰ αὐτὰ μέρη τὰς ὑπὸ ΒΗΘ, ΗΘΔ δυσὶν ὀρθαῖς and the (sum of the) internal (angles) on the same side,
ἴσας. BGH and GHD, equal to two right-angles.
Εἰ γὰρ ἄνισός ἐστιν ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΗΘ τῇ ὑπὸ ΗΘΔ, μία αὐτῶν For if AGH is unequal to GHD then one of them is
μείζων ἐστίν. ἔστω μείζων ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΗΘ· κοινὴ προσκείσθω greater. Let AGH be greater. Let BGH have been added
ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΗΘ· αἱ ἄρα ὑπὸ ΑΗΘ, ΒΗΘ τῶν ὑπὸ ΒΗΘ, ΗΘΔ to both. Thus, (the sum of) AGH and BGH is greater
μείζονές εἰσιν. ἀλλὰ αἱ ὑπὸ ΑΗΘ, ΒΗΘ δυσὶν ὀρθαῖς ἴσαι than (the sum of) BGH and GHD. But, (the sum of)
εἰσίν. [καὶ] αἱ ἄρα ὑπὸ ΒΗΘ, ΗΘΔ δύο ὀρθῶν ἐλάσσονές AGH and BGH is equal to two right-angles [Prop 1.13].
εἰσιν. αἱ δὲ ἀπ᾿ ἐλασσόνων ἢ δύο ὀρθῶν ἐκβαλλόμεναι Thus, (the sum of) BGH and GHD is [also] less than
εἰς ἄπειρον συμπίπτουσιν· αἱ ἄρα ΑΒ, ΓΔ ἐκβαλλόμεναι two right-angles. But (straight-lines) being produced to
εἰς ἄπειρον συμπεσοῦνται· οὐ συμπίπτουσι δὲ διὰ τὸ πα- infinity from (internal angles whose sum is) less than two
ραλλήλους αὐτὰς ὑποκεῖσθαι· οὐκ ἄρα ἄνισός ἐστιν ἡ ὑπὸ right-angles meet together [Post. 5]. Thus, AB and CD,
ΑΗΘ τῇ ὑπὸ ΗΘΔ· ἴση ἄρα. ἀλλὰ ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΗΘ τῇ ὑπὸ ΕΗΒ being produced to infinity, will meet together. But they do
ἐστιν ἴση· καὶ ἡ ὑπὸ ΕΗΒ ἄρα τῇ ὑπὸ ΗΘΔ ἐστιν ἴση· κοινὴ not meet, on account of them (initially) being assumed
προσκείσθω ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΗΘ· αἱ ἄρα ὑπὸ ΕΗΒ, ΒΗΘ ταῖς ὑπὸ parallel (to one another) [Def. 1.23]. Thus, AGH is not
ΒΗΘ, ΗΘΔ ἴσαι εἰσίν. ἀλλὰ αἱ ὑπὸ ΕΗΒ, ΒΗΘ δύο ὀρθαῖς unequal to GHD. Thus, (it is) equal. But, AGH is equal
ἴσαι εἰσίν· καὶ αἱ ὑπὸ ΒΗΘ, ΗΘΔ ἄρα δύο ὀρθαῖς ἴσαι εἰσίν. to EGB [Prop. 1.15]. And EGB is thus also equal to
῾Η ἄρα εἰς τὰς παραλλήλους εὐθείας εὐθεῖα ἐμπίπτουσα GHD. Let BGH be added to both. Thus, (the sum of)
τάς τε ἐναλλὰξ γωνίας ἴσας ἀλλήλαις ποιεῖ καὶ τὴν ἐκτὸς EGB and BGH is equal to (the sum of) BGH and GHD.
τῇ ἐντὸς καὶ ἀπεναντίον ἴσην καὶ τὰς ἐντὸς καὶ ἐπὶ τὰ αὐτὰ But, (the sum of) EGB and BGH is equal to two right32
STOIQEIWN aþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 1
μέρη δυσὶν ὀρθαῖς ἴσας· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. angles [Prop. 1.13]. Thus, (the sum of) BGH and GHD
is also equal to two right-angles.
Thus, a straight-line falling across parallel straightlines makes the alternate angles equal to one another, the
external (angle) equal to the internal and opposite (angle), and the (sum of the) internal (angles) on the same
side equal to two right-angles. (Which is) the very thing
it was required to show.
lþ. Proposition 30
Αἱ τῇ αὐτῇ εὐθείᾳ παράλληλοι καὶ ἀλλήλαις εἰσὶ παράλλη- (Straight-lines) parallel to the same straight-line are
λοι. also parallel to one another.
Β
Γ
Ε
Α
Ζ
Κ ∆
Η
Θ
C
A
E
K
G
F
D
H
B
῎Εστω ἑκατέρα τῶν ΑΒ, ΓΔ τῇ ΕΖ παράλληλος· λέγω, Let each of the (straight-lines) AB and CD be parallel
ὅτι καὶ ἡ ΑΒ τῇ ΓΔ ἐστι παράλληλος. to EF. I say that AB is also parallel to CD.
᾿Εμπιπτέτω γὰρ εἰς αὐτὰς εὐθεῖα ἡ ΗΚ. For let the straight-line GK fall across (AB, CD, and
Καὶ ἐπεὶ εἰς παραλλήλους εὐθείας τὰς ΑΒ, ΕΖ εὐθεῖα EF).
ἐμπέπτωκεν ἡ ΗΚ, ἴση ἄρα ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΗΚ τῇ ὑπὸ ΗΘΖ. And since the straight-line GK has fallen across the
πάλιν, ἐπεὶ εἰς παραλλήλους εὐθείας τὰς ΕΖ, ΓΔ εὐθεῖα parallel straight-lines AB and EF, (angle) AGK (is) thus
ἐμπέπτωκεν ἡ ΗΚ, ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ὑπὸ ΗΘΖ τῇ ὑπὸ ΗΚΔ. equal to GHF [Prop. 1.29]. Again, since the straight-line
ἐδείχθη δὲ καὶ ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΗΚ τῇ ὑπὸ ΗΘΖ ἴση. καὶ ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΗΚ GK has fallen across the parallel straight-lines EF and
ἄρα τῇ ὑπὸ ΗΚΔ ἐστιν ἴση· καί εἰσιν ἐναλλάξ. παράλληλος CD, (angle) GHF is equal to GKD [Prop. 1.29]. But
ἄρα ἐστὶν ἡ ΑΒ τῇ ΓΔ. AGK was also shown (to be) equal to GHF. Thus, AGK
[Αἱ ἄρα τῇ αὐτῇ εὐθείᾳ παράλληλοι καὶ ἀλλήλαις εἰσὶ is also equal to GKD. And they are alternate (angles).
παράλληλοι·] ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. Thus, AB is parallel to CD [Prop. 1.27].
[Thus, (straight-lines) parallel to the same straightline are also parallel to one another.] (Which is) the very
thing it was required to show.
laþ. Proposition 31
Διὰ τοῦ δοθέντος σημείου τῇ δοθείσῃ εὐθείᾳ παράλληλον To draw a straight-line parallel to a given straight-line,
εὐθεῖαν γραμμὴν ἀγαγεῖν. through a given point.
῎Εστω τὸ μὲν δοθὲν σημεῖον τὸ Α, ἡ δὲ δοθεῖσα εὐθεῖα Let A be the given point, and BC the given straightἡ ΒΓ· δεῖ δὴ διὰ τοῦ Α σημείου τῇ ΒΓ εὐθείᾳ παράλληλον line. So it is required to draw a straight-line parallel to
εὐθεῖαν γραμμὴν ἀγαγεῖν. the straight-line BC, through the point A.
Εἰλήφθω ἐπὶ τῆς ΒΓ τυχὸν σημεῖον τὸ Δ, καὶ ἐπεζεύχθω Let the point D have been taken a random on BC, and
ἡ ΑΔ· καὶ συνεστάτω πρὸς τῇ ΔΑ εὐθείᾳ καὶ τῷ πρὸς αὐτῇ let AD have been joined. And let (angle) DAE, equal to
σημείῳ τῷ Α τῇ ὑπὸ ΑΔΓ γωνίᾳ ἴση ἡ ὑπὸ ΔΑΕ· καὶ angle ADC, have been constructed on the straight-line
33
STOIQEIWN aþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 1
ἐκβεβλήσθω ἐπ᾿ εὐθείας τῇ ΕΑ εὐθεῖα ἡ ΑΖ. DA at the point A on it [Prop. 1.23]. And let the straightline AF have been produced in a straight-line with EA.
Γ
Ε
Β
∆
Α Ζ
C
E
B
D
A
F
Καὶ ἐπεὶ εἰς δύο εὐθείας τὰς ΒΓ, ΕΖ εὐθεῖα ἐμπίπτουσα And since the straight-line AD, (in) falling across the
ἡ ΑΔ τὰς ἐναλλὰξ γωνίας τὰς ὑπὸ ΕΑΔ, ΑΔΓ ἴσας two straight-lines BC and EF, has made the alternate
ἀλλήλαις πεποίηκεν, παράλληλος ἄρα ἐστὶν ἡ ΕΑΖ τῇ ΒΓ. angles EAD and ADC equal to one another, EAF is thus
Διὰ τοῦ δοθέντος ἄρα σημείου τοῦ Α τῇ δοθείσῃ εὐθείᾳ parallel to BC [Prop. 1.27].
τῇ ΒΓ παράλληλος εὐθεῖα γραμμὴ ἦκται ἡ ΕΑΖ· ὅπερ ἔδει Thus, the straight-line EAF has been drawn parallel
ποιῆσαι. to the given straight-line BC, through the given point A.
(Which is) the very thing it was required to do.
lbþ. Proposition 32
Παντὸς τριγώνου μιᾶς τῶν πλευρῶν προσεκβληθείσης In any triangle, (if) one of the sides (is) produced
ἡ ἐκτὸς γωνία δυσὶ ταῖς ἐντὸς καὶ ἀπεναντίον ἴση ἐστίν, καὶ (then) the external angle is equal to the (sum of the) two
αἱ ἐντὸς τοῦ τριγώνου τρεῖς γωνίαι δυσὶν ὀρθαῖς ἴσαι εἰσίν. internal and opposite (angles), and the (sum of the) three
internal angles of the triangle is equal to two right-angles.
Γ ∆
Α Ε
Β C
A E
B D
῎Εστω τρίγωνον τὸ ΑΒΓ, καὶ προσεκβεβλήσθω αὐτοῦ Let ABC be a triangle, and let one of its sides BC
μία πλευρὰ ἡ ΒΓ ἐπὶ τὸ Δ· λέγω, ὅτι ἡ ἐκτὸς γωνία ἡ ὑπὸ have been produced to D. I say that the external angle
ΑΓΔ ἴση ἐστὶ δυσὶ ταῖς ἐντὸς καὶ ἀπεναντίον ταῖς ὑπὸ ΓΑΒ, ACD is equal to the (sum of the) two internal and oppoΑΒΓ, καὶ αἱ ἐντὸς τοῦ τριγώνου τρεῖς γωνίαι αἱ ὑπὸ ΑΒΓ, site angles CAB and ABC, and the (sum of the) three
ΒΓΑ, ΓΑΒ δυσὶν ὀρθαῖς ἴσαι εἰσίν. internal angles of the triangle—ABC, BCA, and CAB—
῎Ηχθω γὰρ διὰ τοῦ Γ σημείου τῇ ΑΒ εὐθείᾳ παράλληλος is equal to two right-angles.
ἡ ΓΕ. For let CE have been drawn through point C parallel
Καὶ ἐπεὶ παράλληλός ἐστιν ἡ ΑΒ τῇ ΓΕ, καὶ εἰς αὐτὰς to the straight-line AB [Prop. 1.31].
ἐμπέπτωκεν ἡ ΑΓ, αἱ ἐναλλὰξ γωνίαι αἱ ὑπὸ ΒΑΓ, ΑΓΕ ἴσαι And since AB is parallel to CE, and AC has fallen
ἀλλήλαις εἰσίν. πάλιν, ἐπεὶ παράλληλός ἐστιν ἡ ΑΒ τῇ ΓΕ, across them, the alternate angles BAC and ACE are
καὶ εἰς αὐτὰς ἐμπέπτωκεν εὐθεῖα ἡ ΒΔ, ἡ ἐκτὸς γωνία ἡ equal to one another [Prop. 1.29]. Again, since AB is
ὑπὸ ΕΓΔ ἴση ἐστὶ τῇ ἐντὸς καὶ ἀπεναντίον τῇ ὑπὸ ΑΒΓ. parallel to CE, and the straight-line BD has fallen across
ἐδείχθη δὲ καὶ ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΓΕ τῇ ὑπὸ ΒΑΓ ἴση· ὅλη ἄρα ἡ ὑπὸ them, the external angle ECD is equal to the internal
ΑΓΔ γωνία ἴση ἐστὶ δυσὶ ταῖς ἐντὸς καὶ ἀπεναντίον ταῖς ὑπὸ and opposite (angle) ABC [Prop. 1.29]. But ACE was
ΒΑΓ, ΑΒΓ. also shown (to be) equal to BAC. Thus, the whole an34
STOIQEIWN aþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 1
Κοινὴ προσκείσθω ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΓΒ· αἱ ἄρα ὑπὸ ΑΓΔ, ΑΓΒ gle ACD is equal to the (sum of the) two internal and
τρισὶ ταῖς ὑπὸ ΑΒΓ, ΒΓΑ, ΓΑΒ ἴσαι εἰσίν. ἀλλ᾿ αἱ ὑπὸ ΑΓΔ, opposite (angles) BAC and ABC.
ΑΓΒ δυσὶν ὀρθαῖς ἴσαι εἰσίν· καὶ αἱ ὑπὸ ΑΓΒ, ΓΒΑ, ΓΑΒ Let ACB have been added to both. Thus, (the sum
ἄρα δυσὶν ὀρθαῖς ἴσαι εἰσίν. of) ACD and ACB is equal to the (sum of the) three
Παντὸς ἄρα τριγώνου μιᾶς τῶν πλευρῶν προσεκ- (angles) ABC, BCA, and CAB. But, (the sum of) ACD
βληθείσης ἡ ἐκτὸς γωνία δυσὶ ταῖς ἐντὸς καὶ ἀπεναντίον and ACB is equal to two right-angles [Prop. 1.13]. Thus,
ἴση ἐστίν, καὶ αἱ ἐντὸς τοῦ τριγώνου τρεῖς γωνίαι δυσὶν (the sum of) ACB, CBA, and CAB is also equal to two
ὀρθαῖς ἴσαι εἰσίν· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. right-angles.
Thus, in any triangle, (if) one of the sides (is) produced (then) the external angle is equal to the (sum of
the) two internal and opposite (angles), and the (sum of
the) three internal angles of the triangle is equal to two
right-angles. (Which is) the very thing it was required to
show.
lgþ. Proposition 33
Αἱ τὰς ἴσας τε καὶ παραλλήλους ἐπὶ τὰ αὐτὰ μέρη ἐπι- Straight-lines joining equal and parallel (straightζευγνύουσαι εὐθεῖαι καὶ αὐταὶ ἴσαι τε καὶ παράλληλοί εἰσιν. lines) on the same sides are themselves also equal and
parallel.
Β Α
∆ Γ D C
B A
῎Εστωσαν ἴσαι τε καὶ παράλληλοι αἱ ΑΒ, ΓΔ, καὶ ἐπι- Let AB and CD be equal and parallel (straight-lines),
ζευγνύτωσαν αὐτὰς ἐπὶ τὰ αὐτὰ μέρη εὐθεῖαι αἱ ΑΓ, ΒΔ· and let the straight-lines AC and BD join them on the
λέγω, ὅτι καὶ αἱ ΑΓ, ΒΔ ἴσαι τε καὶ παράλληλοί εἰσιν. same sides. I say that AC and BD are also equal and
᾿Επεζεύχθω ἡ ΒΓ. καὶ ἐπεὶ παράλληλός ἐστιν ἡ ΑΒ τῇ parallel.
ΓΔ, καὶ εἰς αὐτὰς ἐμπέπτωκεν ἡ ΒΓ, αἱ ἐναλλὰξ γωνίαι αἱ Let BC have been joined. And since AB is paralὑπὸ ΑΒΓ, ΒΓΔ ἴσαι ἀλλήλαις εἰσίν. καὶ ἐπεὶ ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ΑΒ lel to CD, and BC has fallen across them, the alterτῇ ΓΔ κοινὴ δὲ ἡ ΒΓ, δύο δὴ αἱ ΑΒ, ΒΓ δύο ταῖς ΒΓ, ΓΔ ἴσαι nate angles ABC and BCD are equal to one another
εἰσίν· καὶ γωνία ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΒΓ γωνίᾳ τῇ ὑπὸ ΒΓΔ ἴση· βάσις [Prop. 1.29]. And since AB is equal to CD, and BC
ἄρα ἡ ΑΓ βάσει τῇ ΒΔ ἐστιν ἴση, καὶ τὸ ΑΒΓ τρίγωνον τῷ is common, the two (straight-lines) AB, BC are equal
ΒΓΔ τριγώνῳ ἴσον ἐστίν, καὶ αἱ λοιπαὶ γωνίαι ταῖς λοιπαῖς to the two (straight-lines) DC, CB.
†And the angle ABC
γωνίαις ἴσαι ἔσονται ἑκατέρα ἑκατέρᾳ, ὑφ᾿ ἃς αἱ ἴσαι πλευραὶ is equal to the angle BCD. Thus, the base AC is equal
ὑποτείνουσιν· ἴση ἄρα ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΓΒ γωνία τῇ ὑπὸ ΓΒΔ. καὶ to the base BD, and triangle ABC is equal to triangle
ἐπεὶ εἰς δύο εὐθείας τὰς ΑΓ, ΒΔ εὐθεῖα ἐμπίπτουσα ἡ ΒΓ DCB‡
, and the remaining angles will be equal to the
τὰς ἐναλλὰξ γωνίας ἴσας ἀλλήλαις πεποίηκεν, παράλληλος corresponding remaining angles subtended by the equal
ἄρα ἐστὶν ἡ ΑΓ τῇ ΒΔ. ἐδείχθη δὲ αὐτῇ καὶ ἴση. sides [Prop. 1.4]. Thus, angle ACB is equal to CBD.
Αἱ ἄρα τὰς ἴσας τε καὶ παραλλήλους ἐπὶ τὰ αὐτὰ μέρη Also, since the straight-line BC, (in) falling across the
ἐπιζευγνύουσαι εὐθεῖαι καὶ αὐταὶ ἴσαι τε καὶ παράλληλοί two straight-lines AC and BD, has made the alternate
εἰσιν· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. angles (ACB and CBD) equal to one another, AC is thus
parallel to BD [Prop. 1.27]. And (AC) was also shown
(to be) equal to (BD).
Thus, straight-lines joining equal and parallel (straight35
STOIQEIWN aþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 1
lines) on the same sides are themselves also equal and
parallel. (Which is) the very thing it was required to
show.
† The Greek text has “BC, CD”, which is obviously a mistake.
‡ The Greek text has “DCB”, which is obviously a mistake.
ldþ. Proposition 34
Τῶν παραλληλογράμμων χωρίων αἱ ἀπεναντίον πλευραί In parallelogrammic figures the opposite sides and angles
τε καὶ γωνίαι ἴσαι ἀλλήλαις εἰσίν, καὶ ἡ διάμετρος αὐτὰ δίχα are equal to one another, and a diagonal cuts them in half.
τέμνει.
Α
Γ
Β
∆ C
A B
D
῎Εστω παραλληλόγραμμον χωρίον τὸ ΑΓΔΒ, διάμετρος Let ACDB be a parallelogrammic figure, and BC its
δὲ αὐτοῦ ἡ ΒΓ· λέγω, ὅτι τοῦ ΑΓΔΒ παραλληλογράμμου αἱ diagonal. I say that for parallelogram ACDB, the oppoἀπεναντίον πλευραί τε καὶ γωνίαι ἴσαι ἀλλήλαις εἰσίν, καὶ ἡ site sides and angles are equal to one another, and the
ΒΓ διάμετρος αὐτὸ δίχα τέμνει. diagonal BC cuts it in half.
᾿Επεὶ γὰρ παράλληλός ἐστιν ἡ ΑΒ τῇ ΓΔ, καὶ εἰς αὐτὰς For since AB is parallel to CD, and the straight-line
ἐμπέπτωκεν εὐθεῖα ἡ ΒΓ, αἱ ἐναλλὰξ γωνίαι αἱ ὑπὸ ΑΒΓ, BC has fallen across them, the alternate angles ABC and
ΒΓΔ ἴσαι ἀλλήλαις εἰσίν. πάλιν ἐπεὶ παράλληλός ἐστιν ἡ ΑΓ BCD are equal to one another [Prop. 1.29]. Again, since
τῇ ΒΔ, καὶ εἰς αὐτὰς ἐμπέπτωκεν ἡ ΒΓ, αἱ ἐναλλὰξ γωνίαι AC is parallel to BD, and BC has fallen across them,
αἱ ὑπὸ ΑΓΒ, ΓΒΔ ἴσαι ἀλλήλαις εἰσίν. δύο δὴ τρίγωνά ἐστι the alternate angles ACB and CBD are equal to one
τὰ ΑΒΓ, ΒΓΔ τὰς δύο γωνίας τὰς ὑπὸ ΑΒΓ, ΒΓΑ δυσὶ another [Prop. 1.29]. So ABC and BCD are two triταῖς ὑπὸ ΒΓΔ, ΓΒΔ ἴσας ἔχοντα ἑκατέραν ἑκατέρᾳ καὶ μίαν angles having the two angles ABC and BCA equal to
πλευρὰν μιᾷ πλευρᾷ ἴσην τὴν πρὸς ταῖς ἴσαις γωνίαις κοινὴν the two (angles) BCD and CBD, respectively, and one
αὐτῶν τὴν ΒΓ· καὶ τὰς λοιπὰς ἄρα πλευρὰς ταῖς λοιπαῖς side equal to one side—the (one) by the equal angles and
ἴσας ἕξει ἑκατέραν ἑκατέρᾳ καὶ τὴν λοιπὴν γωνίαν τῇ λοιπῇ common to them, (namely) BC. Thus, they will also
γωνίᾳ· ἴση ἄρα ἡ μὲν ΑΒ πλευρὰ τῇ ΓΔ, ἡ δὲ ΑΓ τῇ ΒΔ, have the remaining sides equal to the corresponding reκαὶ ἔτι ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΑΓ γωνία τῇ ὑπὸ ΓΔΒ. καὶ ἐπεὶ maining (sides), and the remaining angle (equal) to the
ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ μὲν ὑπὸ ΑΒΓ γωνία τῇ ὑπὸ ΒΓΔ, ἡ δὲ ὑπὸ ΓΒΔ remaining angle [Prop. 1.26]. Thus, side AB is equal to
τῇ ὑπὸ ΑΓΒ, ὅλη ἄρα ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΒΔ ὅλῃ τῇ ὑπὸ ΑΓΔ ἐστιν CD, and AC to BD. Furthermore, angle BAC is equal
ἴση. ἐδείχθη δὲ καὶ ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΑΓ τῇ ὑπὸ ΓΔΒ ἴση. to CDB. And since angle ABC is equal to BCD, and
Τῶν ἄρα παραλληλογράμμων χωρίων αἱ ἀπεναντίον CBD to ACB, the whole (angle) ABD is thus equal to
πλευραί τε καὶ γωνίαι ἴσαι ἀλλήλαις εἰσίν. the whole (angle) ACD. And BAC was also shown (to
Λέγω δή, ὅτι καὶ ἡ διάμετρος αὐτὰ δίχα τέμνει. ἐπεὶ γὰρ be) equal to CDB.
ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ΑΒ τῇ ΓΔ, κοινὴ δὲ ἡ ΒΓ, δύο δὴ αἱ ΑΒ, ΒΓ Thus, in parallelogrammic figures the opposite sides
δυσὶ ταῖς ΓΔ, ΒΓ ἴσαι εἰσὶν ἑκατέρα ἑκατέρᾳ· καὶ γωνία ἡ and angles are equal to one another.
ὑπὸ ΑΒΓ γωνίᾳ τῇ ὑπὸ ΒΓΔ ἴση. καὶ βάσις ἄρα ἡ ΑΓ τῇ And, I also say that a diagonal cuts them in half. For
ΔΒ ἴση. καὶ τὸ ΑΒΓ [ἄρα] τρίγωνον τῷ ΒΓΔ τριγώνῳ ἴσον since AB is equal to CD, and BC (is) common, the two
ἐστίν. (straight-lines) AB, BC are equal to the two (straight-
῾Η ἄρα ΒΓ διάμετρος δίχα τέμνει τὸ ΑΒΓΔ παραλ- lines) DC, CB†
, respectively. And angle ABC is equal to
ληλόγραμμον· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. angle BCD. Thus, the base AC (is) also equal to DB,
36
STOIQEIWN aþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 1
and triangle ABC is equal to triangle BCD [Prop. 1.4].
Thus, the diagonal BC cuts the parallelogram ACDB‡
in half. (Which is) the very thing it was required to show.
† The Greek text has “CD, BC”, which is obviously a mistake.
‡ The Greek text has “ABCD”, which is obviously a mistake.
leþ. Proposition 35
Τὰ παραλληλόγραμμα τὰ ἐπὶ τῆς αὐτῆς βάσεως ὄντα καὶ Parallelograms which are on the same base and beἐν ταῖς αὐταῖς παραλλήλοις ἴσα ἀλλήλοις ἐστίν. tween the same parallels are equal†
to one another.
∆
Β Γ
Η
Α Ζ Ε
B C
D E
G
A F
῎Εστω παραλληλόγραμμα τὰ ΑΒΓΔ, ΕΒΓΖ ἐπὶ τῆς Let ABCD and EBCF be parallelograms on the same
αὐτῆς βάσεως τῆς ΒΓ καὶ ἐν ταῖς αὐταῖς παραλλήλοις ταῖς base BC, and between the same parallels AF and BC. I
ΑΖ, ΒΓ· λέγω, ὅτι ἴσον ἐστὶ τὸ ΑΒΓΔ τῷ ΕΒΓΖ παραλλη- say that ABCD is equal to parallelogram EBCF.
λογράμμῳ. For since ABCD is a parallelogram, AD is equal to
᾿Επεὶ γὰρ παραλληλόγραμμόν ἐστι τὸ ΑΒΓΔ, ἴση ἐστὶν BC [Prop. 1.34]. So, for the same (reasons), EF is also
ἡ ΑΔ τῇ ΒΓ. διὰ τὰ αὐτὰ δὴ καὶ ἡ ΕΖ τῇ ΒΓ ἐστιν ἴση· equal to BC. So AD is also equal to EF. And DE is
ὥστε καὶ ἡ ΑΔ τῇ ΕΖ ἐστιν ἴση· καὶ κοινὴ ἡ ΔΕ· ὅλη ἄρα common. Thus, the whole (straight-line) AE is equal to
ἡ ΑΕ ὅλῃ τῇ ΔΖ ἐστιν ἴση. ἔστι δὲ καὶ ἡ ΑΒ τῇ ΔΓ ἴση· the whole (straight-line) DF. And AB is also equal to
δύο δὴ αἱ ΕΑ, ΑΒ δύο ταῖς ΖΔ, ΔΓ ἴσαι εἰσὶν ἑκατέρα DC. So the two (straight-lines) EA, AB are equal to
ἑκατέρᾳ· καὶ γωνία ἡ ὑπὸ ΖΔΓ γωνίᾳ τῇ ὑπὸ ΕΑΒ ἐστιν the two (straight-lines) FD, DC, respectively. And angle
ἴση ἡ ἐκτὸς τῇ ἐντός· βάσις ἄρα ἡ ΕΒ βάσει τῇ ΖΓ ἴση ἐστίν, FDC is equal to angle EAB, the external to the interκαὶ τὸ ΕΑΒ τρίγωνον τῷ ΔΖΓ τριγώνῳ ἴσον ἔσται· κοινὸν nal [Prop. 1.29]. Thus, the base EB is equal to the base
ἀφῃρήσθω τὸ ΔΗΕ· λοιπὸν ἄρα τὸ ΑΒΗΔ τραπέζιον λοιπῷ FC, and triangle EAB will be equal to triangle DFC
τῷ ΕΗΓΖ τραπεζίῳ ἐστὶν ἴσον· κοινὸν προσκείσθω τὸ ΗΒΓ [Prop. 1.4]. Let DGE have been taken away from both.
τρίγωνον· ὅλον ἄρα τὸ ΑΒΓΔ παραλληλόγραμμον ὅλῳ τῷ Thus, the remaining trapezium ABGD is equal to the reΕΒΓΖ παραλληλογράμμῳ ἴσον ἐστίν. maining trapezium EGCF. Let triangle GBC have been
Τὰ ἄρα παραλληλόγραμμα τὰ ἐπὶ τῆς αὐτῆς βάσεως ὄντα added to both. Thus, the whole parallelogram ABCD is
καὶ ἐν ταῖς αὐταῖς παραλλήλοις ἴσα ἀλλήλοις ἐστίν· ὅπερ ἔδει equal to the whole parallelogram EBCF.
δεῖξαι. Thus, parallelograms which are on the same base and
between the same parallels are equal to one another.
(Which is) the very thing it was required to show.
† Here, for the first time, “equal” means “equal in area”, rather than “congruent”.
lþ. Proposition 36
Τὰ παραλληλόγραμμα τὰ ἐπὶ ἴσων βάσεων ὄντα καὶ ἐν Parallelograms which are on equal bases and between
ταῖς αὐταῖς παραλλήλοις ἴσα ἀλλήλοις ἐστίν. the same parallels are equal to one another.
῎Εστω παραλληλόγραμμα τὰ ΑΒΓΔ, ΕΖΗΘ ἐπὶ ἴσων Let ABCD and EFGH be parallelograms which are
βάσεων ὄντα τῶν ΒΓ, ΖΗ καὶ ἐν ταῖς αὐταῖς παραλλήλοις on the equal bases BC and FG, and (are) between the
ταῖς ΑΘ, ΒΗ· λέγω, ὅτι ἴσον ἐστὶ τὸ ΑΒΓΔ παραλ- same parallels AH and BG. I say that the parallelogram
37
STOIQEIWN aþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 1
ληλόγραμμον τῷ ΕΖΗΘ. ABCD is equal to EFGH.
Γ Ζ Η
Α ∆ Ε Θ
Β G
A D E H
B C F
᾿Επεζεύχθωσαν γὰρ αἱ ΒΕ, ΓΘ. καὶ ἐπεὶ ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ For let BE and CH have been joined. And since BC is
ΒΓ τῇ ΖΗ, ἀλλὰ ἡ ΖΗ τῇ ΕΘ ἐστιν ἴση, καὶ ἡ ΒΓ ἄρα τῇ equal to FG, but FG is equal to EH [Prop. 1.34], BC is
ΕΘ ἐστιν ἴση. εἰσὶ δὲ καὶ παράλληλοι. καὶ ἐπιζευγνύουσιν thus equal to EH. And they are also parallel, and EB and
αὐτὰς αἱ ΕΒ, ΘΓ· αἱ δὲ τὰς ἴσας τε καὶ παραλλήλους ἐπὶ HC join them. But (straight-lines) joining equal and parτὰ αὐτὰ μέρη ἐπιζευγνύουσαι ἴσαι τε καὶ παράλληλοί εἰσι allel (straight-lines) on the same sides are (themselves)
[καὶ αἱ ΕΒ, ΘΓ ἄρα ἴσαι τέ εἰσι καὶ παράλληλοι]. παραλ- equal and parallel [Prop. 1.33] [thus, EB and HC are
ληλόγραμμον ἄρα ἐστὶ τὸ ΕΒΓΘ. καί ἐστιν ἴσον τῷ ΑΒΓΔ· also equal and parallel]. Thus, EBCH is a parallelogram
βάσιν τε γὰρ αὐτῷ τὴν αὐτὴν ἔχει τὴν ΒΓ, καὶ ἐν ταῖς αὐταῖς [Prop. 1.34], and is equal to ABCD. For it has the same
παραλλήλοις ἐστὶν αὐτῷ ταῖς ΒΓ, ΑΘ. δὶα τὰ αὐτὰ δὴ καὶ τὸ base, BC, as (ABCD), and is between the same paralΕΖΗΘ τῷ αὐτῷ τῷ ΕΒΓΘ ἐστιν ἴσον· ὥστε καὶ τὸ ΑΒΓΔ lels, BC and AH, as (ABCD) [Prop. 1.35]. So, for the
παραλληλόγραμμον τῷ ΕΖΗΘ ἐστιν ἴσον. same (reasons), EFGH is also equal to the same (parΤὰ ἄρα παραλληλόγραμμα τὰ ἐπὶ ἴσων βάσεων ὄντα καὶ allelogram) EBCH [Prop. 1.34]. So that the paralleloἐν ταῖς αὐταῖς παραλλήλοις ἴσα ἀλλήλοις ἐστίν· ὅπερ ἔδει gram ABCD is also equal to EFGH.
δεῖξαι. Thus, parallelograms which are on equal bases and
between the same parallels are equal to one another.
(Which is) the very thing it was required to show.
lzþ. Proposition 37
Τὰ τρίγωνα τὰ ἐπὶ τῆς αὐτῆς βάσεως ὄντα καὶ ἐν ταῖς Triangles which are on the same base and between
αὐταῖς παραλλήλοις ἴσα ἀλλήλοις ἐστίν. the same parallels are equal to one another.
Α ∆
Γ
Ε Ζ
Β
A
E
D
C
F
B
῎Εστω τρίγωνα τὰ ΑΒΓ, ΔΒΓ ἐπὶ τῆς αὐτῆς βάσεως τῆς Let ABC and DBC be triangles on the same base BC,
ΒΓ καὶ ἐν ταῖς αὐταῖς παραλλήλοις ταῖς ΑΔ, ΒΓ· λέγω, ὅτι and between the same parallels AD and BC. I say that
ἴσον ἐστὶ τὸ ΑΒΓ τρίγωνον τῷ ΔΒΓ τριγώνῳ. triangle ABC is equal to triangle DBC.
᾿Εκβεβλήσθω ἡ ΑΔ ἐφ᾿ ἑκάτερα τὰ μέρη ἐπὶ τὰ Ε, Ζ, καὶ Let AD have been produced in both directions to E
διὰ μὲν τοῦ Β τῇ ΓΑ παράλληλος ἤχθω ἡ ΒΕ, δὶα δὲ τοῦ Γ τῇ and F, and let the (straight-line) BE have been drawn
ΒΔ παράλληλος ἤχθω ἡ ΓΖ. παραλληλόγραμμον ἄρα ἐστὶν through B parallel to CA [Prop. 1.31], and let the
ἑκάτερον τῶν ΕΒΓΑ, ΔΒΓΖ· καί εἰσιν ἴσα· ἐπί τε γὰρ τῆς (straight-line) CF have been drawn through C parallel
αὐτῆς βάσεώς εἰσι τῆς ΒΓ καὶ ἐν ταῖς αὐταῖς παραλλήλοις to BD [Prop. 1.31]. Thus, EBCA and DBCF are both
ταῖς ΒΓ, ΕΖ· καί ἐστι τοῦ μὲν ΕΒΓΑ παραλληλογράμμου parallelograms, and are equal. For they are on the same
ἥμισυ τὸ ΑΒΓ τρίγωνον· ἡ γὰρ ΑΒ διάμετρος αὐτὸ δίχα base BC, and between the same parallels BC and EF
τέμνει· τοῦ δὲ ΔΒΓΖ παραλληλογράμμου ἥμισυ τὸ ΔΒΓ [Prop. 1.35]. And the triangle ABC is half of the paralτρίγωνον· ἡ γὰρ ΔΓ διάμετρος αὐτὸ δίχα τέμνει. [τὰ δὲ lelogram EBCA. For the diagonal AB cuts the latter in
38
STOIQEIWN aþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 1
τῶν ἴσων ἡμίση ἴσα ἀλλήλοις ἐστίν]. ἴσον ἄρα ἐστὶ τὸ ΑΒΓ half [Prop. 1.34]. And the triangle DBC (is) half of the
τρίγωνον τῷ ΔΒΓ τριγώνῳ. parallelogram DBCF. For the diagonal DC cuts the latΤὰ ἄρα τρίγωνα τὰ ἐπὶ τῆς αὐτῆς βάσεως ὄντα καὶ ἐν ταῖς ter in half [Prop. 1.34]. [And the halves of equal things
αὐταῖς παραλλήλοις ἴσα ἀλλήλοις ἐστίν· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. are equal to one another.]† Thus, triangle ABC is equal
to triangle DBC.
Thus, triangles which are on the same base and
between the same parallels are equal to one another.
(Which is) the very thing it was required to show.
† This is an additional common notion.
lhþ. Proposition 38
Τὰ τρίγωνα τὰ ἐπὶ ἴσων βάσεων ὄντα καὶ ἐν ταῖς αὐταῖς Triangles which are on equal bases and between the
παραλλήλοις ἴσα ἀλλήλοις ἐστίν. same parallels are equal to one another.
Ε Ζ
Η ∆ Θ Α
Β Γ E F
G H A D
B C
῎Εστω τρίγωνα τὰ ΑΒΓ, ΔΕΖ ἐπὶ ἴσων βάσεων τῶν ΒΓ, Let ABC and DEF be triangles on the equal bases
ΕΖ καὶ ἐν ταῖς αὐταῖς παραλλήλοις ταῖς ΒΖ, ΑΔ· λέγω, ὅτι BC and EF, and between the same parallels BF and
ἴσον ἐστὶ τὸ ΑΒΓ τρίγωνον τῷ ΔΕΖ τριγώνῳ. AD. I say that triangle ABC is equal to triangle DEF.
᾿Εκβεβλήσθω γὰρ ἡ ΑΔ ἐφ᾿ ἑκάτερα τὰ μέρη ἐπὶ τὰ Η, For let AD have been produced in both directions
Θ, καὶ διὰ μὲν τοῦ Β τῇ ΓΑ παράλληλος ἤχθω ἡ ΒΗ, δὶα δὲ to G and H, and let the (straight-line) BG have been
τοῦ Ζ τῇ ΔΕ παράλληλος ἤχθω ἡ ΖΘ. παραλληλόγραμμον drawn through B parallel to CA [Prop. 1.31], and let the
ἄρα ἐστὶν ἑκάτερον τῶν ΗΒΓΑ, ΔΕΖΘ· καὶ ἴσον τὸ ΗΒΓΑ (straight-line) FH have been drawn through F parallel
τῷ ΔΕΖΘ· ἐπί τε γὰρ ἴσων βάσεών εἰσι τῶν ΒΓ, ΕΖ καὶ to DE [Prop. 1.31]. Thus, GBCA and DEFH are each
ἐν ταῖς αὐταῖς παραλλήλοις ταῖς ΒΖ, ΗΘ· καί ἐστι τοῦ μὲν parallelograms. And GBCA is equal to DEFH. For they
ΗΒΓΑ παραλληλογράμμου ἥμισυ τὸ ΑΒΓ τρίγωνον. ἡ γὰρ are on the equal bases BC and EF, and between the
ΑΒ διάμετρος αὐτὸ δίχα τέμνει· τοῦ δὲ ΔΕΖΘ παραλλη- same parallels BF and GH [Prop. 1.36]. And triangle
λογράμμου ἥμισυ τὸ ΖΕΔ τρίγωνον· ἡ γὰρ ΔΖ δίαμετρος ABC is half of the parallelogram GBCA. For the diagoαὐτὸ δίχα τέμνει [τὰ δὲ τῶν ἴσων ἡμίση ἴσα ἀλλήλοις ἐστίν]. nal AB cuts the latter in half [Prop. 1.34]. And triangle
ἴσον ἄρα ἐστὶ τὸ ΑΒΓ τρίγωνον τῷ ΔΕΖ τριγώνῳ. FED (is) half of parallelogram DEFH. For the diagonal
Τὰ ἄρα τρίγωνα τὰ ἐπὶ ἴσων βάσεων ὄντα καὶ ἐν ταῖς DF cuts the latter in half. [And the halves of equal things
αὐταῖς παραλλήλοις ἴσα ἀλλήλοις ἐστίν· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. are equal to one another.] Thus, triangle ABC is equal
to triangle DEF.
Thus, triangles which are on equal bases and between
the same parallels are equal to one another. (Which is)
the very thing it was required to show.
ljþ. Proposition 39
Τὰ ἴσα τρίγωνα τὰ ἐπὶ τῆς αὐτῆς βάσεως ὄντα καὶ ἐπὶ Equal triangles which are on the same base, and on
τὰ αὐτὰ μέρη καὶ ἐν ταῖς αὐταῖς παραλλήλοις ἐστίν. the same side, are also between the same parallels.
῎Εστω ἴσα τρίγωνα τὰ ΑΒΓ, ΔΒΓ ἐπὶ τῆς αὐτῆς βάσεως Let ABC and DBC be equal triangles which are on
ὄντα καὶ ἐπὶ τὰ αὐτὰ μέρη τῆς ΒΓ· λέγω, ὅτι καὶ ἐν ταῖς the same base BC, and on the same side (of it). I say that
39
STOIQEIWN aþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 1
αὐταῖς παραλλήλοις ἐστίν. they are also between the same parallels.
Α
Β Γ
Ε
∆
E
A
B
D
C
᾿Επεζεύχθω γὰρ ἡ ΑΔ· λέγω, ὅτι παράλληλός ἐστιν ἡ For let AD have been joined. I say that AD and BC
ΑΔ τῇ ΒΓ. are parallel.
Εἰ γὰρ μή, ἤχθω διὰ τοῦ Α σημείου τῇ ΒΓ εὐθείᾳ For, if not, let AE have been drawn through point A
παράλληλος ἡ ΑΕ, καὶ ἐπεζεύχθω ἡ ΕΓ. ἴσον ἄρα ἐστὶ τὸ parallel to the straight-line BC [Prop. 1.31], and let EC
ΑΒΓ τρίγωνον τῷ ΕΒΓ τριγώνῳ· ἐπί τε γὰρ τῆς αὐτῆς have been joined. Thus, triangle ABC is equal to triangle
βάσεώς ἐστιν αὐτῷ τῆς ΒΓ καὶ ἐν ταῖς αὐταῖς παραλλήλοις. EBC. For it is on the same base as it, BC, and between
ἀλλὰ τὸ ΑΒΓ τῷ ΔΒΓ ἐστιν ἴσον· καὶ τὸ ΔΒΓ ἄρα τῷ ΕΒΓ the same parallels [Prop. 1.37]. But ABC is equal to
ἴσον ἐστὶ τὸ μεῖζον τῷ ἐλάσσονι· ὅπερ ἐστὶν ἀδύνατον· οὐκ DBC. Thus, DBC is also equal to EBC, the greater to
ἄρα παράλληλός ἐστιν ἡ ΑΕ τῇ ΒΓ. ὁμοίως δὴ δείξομεν, the lesser. The very thing is impossible. Thus, AE is not
ὅτι οὐδ᾿ ἄλλη τις πλὴν τῆς ΑΔ· ἡ ΑΔ ἄρα τῇ ΒΓ ἐστι parallel to BC. Similarly, we can show that neither (is)
παράλληλος. any other (straight-line) than AD. Thus, AD is parallel
Τὰ ἄρα ἴσα τρίγωνα τὰ ἐπὶ τῆς αὐτῆς βάσεως ὄντα καὶ to BC.
ἐπὶ τὰ αὐτὰ μέρη καὶ ἐν ταῖς αὐταῖς παραλλήλοις ἐστίν· ὅπερ Thus, equal triangles which are on the same base, and
ἔδει δεῖξαι. on the same side, are also between the same parallels.
(Which is) the very thing it was required to show.
mþ. Proposition 40†
Τὰ ἴσα τρίγωνα τὰ ἐπὶ ἴσων βάσεων ὄντα καὶ ἐπὶ τὰ αὐτὰ Equal triangles which are on equal bases, and on the
μέρη καὶ ἐν ταῖς αὐταῖς παραλλήλοις ἐστίν. same side, are also between the same parallels.
Ζ
Α ∆
Β Ε Γ
F
A
C
D
B E
῎Εστω ἴσα τρίγωνα τὰ ΑΒΓ, ΓΔΕ ἐπὶ ἴσων βάσεων τῶν Let ABC and CDE be equal triangles on the equal
ΒΓ, ΓΕ καὶ ἐπὶ τὰ αὐτὰ μέρη. λέγω, ὅτι καὶ ἐν ταῖς αὐταῖς bases BC and CE (respectively), and on the same side
παραλλήλοις ἐστίν. (of BE). I say that they are also between the same par-
᾿Επεζεύχθω γὰρ ἡ ΑΔ· λέγω, ὅτι παράλληλός ἐστιν ἡ allels.
ΑΔ τῇ ΒΕ. For let AD have been joined. I say that AD is parallel
Εἰ γὰρ μή, ἤχθω διὰ τοῦ Α τῇ ΒΕ παράλληλος ἡ ΑΖ, to BE.
καὶ ἐπεζεύχθω ἡ ΖΕ. ἴσον ἄρα ἐστὶ τὸ ΑΒΓ τρίγωνον For if not, let AF have been drawn through A parallel
τῷ ΖΓΕ τριγώνῳ· ἐπί τε γὰρ ἴσων βάσεών εἰσι τῶν ΒΓ, to BE [Prop. 1.31], and let FE have been joined. Thus,
ΓΕ καὶ ἐν ταῖς αὐταῖς παραλλήλοις ταῖς ΒΕ, ΑΖ. ἀλλὰ τὸ triangle ABC is equal to triangle FCE. For they are on
ΑΒΓ τρίγωνον ἴσον ἐστὶ τῷ ΔΓΕ [τρίγωνῳ]· καὶ τὸ ΔΓΕ equal bases, BC and CE, and between the same paralἄρα [τρίγωνον] ἴσον ἐστὶ τῷ ΖΓΕ τριγώνῳ τὸ μεῖζον τῷ lels, BE and AF [Prop. 1.38]. But, triangle ABC is equal
40
STOIQEIWN aþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 1
ἐλάσσονι· ὅπερ ἐστὶν ἀδύνατον· οὐκ ἄρα παράλληλος ἡ ΑΖ to [triangle] DCE. Thus, [triangle] DCE is also equal to
τῇ ΒΕ. ὁμοίως δὴ δείξομεν, ὅτι οὐδ᾿ ἄλλη τις πλὴν τῆς ΑΔ· triangle FCE, the greater to the lesser. The very thing is
ἡ ΑΔ ἄρα τῇ ΒΕ ἐστι παράλληλος. impossible. Thus, AF is not parallel to BE. Similarly, we
Τὰ ἄρα ἴσα τρίγωνα τὰ ἐπὶ ἴσων βάσεων ὄντα καὶ ἐπὶ τὰ can show that neither (is) any other (straight-line) than
αὐτὰ μέρη καὶ ἐν ταῖς αὐταῖς παραλλήλοις ἐστίν· ὅπερ ἔδει AD. Thus, AD is parallel to BE.
δεῖξαι. Thus, equal triangles which are on equal bases, and
on the same side, are also between the same parallels.
(Which is) the very thing it was required to show.
† This whole proposition is regarded by Heiberg as a relatively early interpolation to the original text.
maþ. Proposition 41
᾿Εὰν παραλληλόγραμμον τριγώνῳ βάσιν τε ἔχῃ τὴν If a parallelogram has the same base as a triangle, and
αὐτὴν καὶ ἐν ταῖς αὐταῖς παραλλήλοις ᾖ, διπλάσιόν ἐστί is between the same parallels, then the parallelogram is
τὸ παραλληλόγραμμον τοῦ τριγώνου. double (the area) of the triangle.
Α ∆
Β
Ε
Γ B
A D E
C
Παραλληλόγραμμον γὰρ τὸ ΑΒΓΔ τριγώνῳ τῷ ΕΒΓ For let parallelogram ABCD have the same base BC
βάσιν τε ἐχέτω τὴν αὐτὴν τὴν ΒΓ καὶ ἐν ταῖς αὐταῖς πα- as triangle EBC, and let it be between the same parallels,
ραλλήλοις ἔστω ταῖς ΒΓ, ΑΕ· λέγω, ὅτι διπλάσιόν ἐστι τὸ BC and AE. I say that parallelogram ABCD is double
ΑΒΓΔ παραλληλόγραμμον τοῦ ΒΕΓ τριγώνου. (the area) of triangle BEC.
᾿Επεζεύχθω γὰρ ἡ ΑΓ. ἴσον δή ἐστι τὸ ΑΒΓ τρίγωνον For let AC have been joined. So triangle ABC is equal
τῷ ΕΒΓ τριγώνῳ· ἐπί τε γὰρ τῆς αὐτῆς βάσεώς ἐστιν to triangle EBC. For it is on the same base, BC, as
αὐτῷ τῆς ΒΓ καὶ ἐν ταῖς αὐταῖς παραλλήλοις ταῖς ΒΓ, ΑΕ. (EBC), and between the same parallels, BC and AE
ἀλλὰ τὸ ΑΒΓΔ παραλληλόγραμμον διπλάσιόν ἐστι τοῦ ΑΒΓ [Prop. 1.37]. But, parallelogram ABCD is double (the
τριγώνου· ἡ γὰρ ΑΓ διάμετρος αὐτὸ δίχα τέμνει· ὥστε area) of triangle ABC. For the diagonal AC cuts the forτὸ ΑΒΓΔ παραλληλόγραμμον καὶ τοῦ ΕΒΓ τριγώνου ἐστὶ mer in half [Prop. 1.34]. So parallelogram ABCD is also
διπλάσιον. double (the area) of triangle EBC.
᾿Εὰν ἄρα παραλληλόγραμμον τριγώνῳ βάσιν τε ἔχῃ τὴν Thus, if a parallelogram has the same base as a trianαὐτὴν καὶ ἐν ταῖς αὐταῖς παραλλήλοις ᾖ, διπλάσιόν ἐστί τὸ gle, and is between the same parallels, then the parallelπαραλληλόγραμμον τοῦ τριγώνου· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. ogram is double (the area) of the triangle. (Which is) the
very thing it was required to show.
mbþ. Proposition 42
Τῷ δοθέντι τριγώνῳ ἴσον παραλληλόγραμμον συστή- To construct a parallelogram equal to a given triangle
σασθαι ἐν τῇ δοθείσῃ γωνίᾳ εὐθυγράμμῳ. in a given rectilinear angle.
῎Εστω τὸ μὲν δοθὲν τρίγωνον τὸ ΑΒΓ, ἡ δὲ δοθεῖσα Let ABC be the given triangle, and D the given rectiγωνία εὐθύγραμμος ἡ Δ· δεῖ δὴ τῷ ΑΒΓ τριγώνῳ ἴσον πα- linear angle. So it is required to construct a parallelogram
ραλληλόγραμμον συστήσασθαι ἐν τῇ Δ γωνίᾳ εὐθυγράμμῳ. equal to triangle ABC in the rectilinear angle D.
41
STOIQEIWN aþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 1
Β
Η
Γ
∆
Ε
Α Ζ F
D
E
G
B C
A
Τετμήσθω ἡ ΒΓ δίχα κατὰ τὸ Ε, καὶ ἐπεζεύχθω ἡ ΑΕ, Let BC have been cut in half at E [Prop. 1.10], and
καὶ συνεστάτω πρὸς τῇ ΕΓ εὐθείᾳ καὶ τῷ πρὸς αὐτῇ σημείῳ let AE have been joined. And let (angle) CEF, equal to
τῷ Ε τῇ Δ γωνίᾳ ἴση ἡ ὑπὸ ΓΕΖ, καὶ διὰ μὲν τοῦ Α τῇ ΕΓ angle D, have been constructed at the point E on the
παράλληλος ἤχθω ἡ ΑΗ, διὰ δὲ τοῦ Γ τῇ ΕΖ παράλληλος straight-line EC [Prop. 1.23]. And let AG have been
ἤχθω ἡ ΓΗ· παραλληλόγραμμον ἄρα ἐστὶ τὸ ΖΕΓΗ. καὶ ἐπεὶ drawn through A parallel to EC [Prop. 1.31], and let CG
ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ΒΕ τῇ ΕΓ, ἴσον ἐστὶ καὶ τὸ ΑΒΕ τρίγωνον τῷ have been drawn through C parallel to EF [Prop. 1.31].
ΑΕΓ τριγώνῳ· ἐπί τε γὰρ ἴσων βάσεών εἰσι τῶν ΒΕ, ΕΓ καὶ Thus, FECG is a parallelogram. And since BE is equal
ἐν ταῖς αὐταῖς παραλλήλοις ταῖς ΒΓ, ΑΗ· διπλάσιον ἄρα ἐστὶ to EC, triangle ABE is also equal to triangle AEC. For
τὸ ΑΒΓ τρίγωνον τοῦ ΑΕΓ τριγώνου. ἔστι δὲ καὶ τὸ ΖΕΓΗ they are on the equal bases, BE and EC, and between
παραλληλόγραμμον διπλάσιον τοῦ ΑΕΓ τριγώνου· βάσιν τε the same parallels, BC and AG [Prop. 1.38]. Thus, triγὰρ αὐτῷ τὴν αὐτὴν ἔχει καὶ ἐν ταῖς αὐταῖς ἐστιν αὐτῷ angle ABC is double (the area) of triangle AEC. And
παραλλήλοις· ἴσον ἄρα ἐστὶ τὸ ΖΕΓΗ παραλληλόγραμμον parallelogram FECG is also double (the area) of triangle
τῷ ΑΒΓ τριγώνῳ. καὶ ἔχει τὴν ὑπὸ ΓΕΖ γωνίαν ἴσην τῇ AEC. For it has the same base as (AEC), and is between
δοθείσῃ τῇ Δ. the same parallels as (AEC) [Prop. 1.41]. Thus, paralΤῷ ἄρα δοθέντι τριγώνῳ τῷ ΑΒΓ ἴσον παραλληλόγραμ- lelogram FECG is equal to triangle ABC. (FECG) also
μον συνέσταται τὸ ΖΕΓΗ ἐν γωνίᾳ τῇ ὑπὸ ΓΕΖ, ἥτις ἐστὶν has the angle CEF equal to the given (angle) D.
ἴση τῇ Δ· ὅπερ ἔδει ποιῆσαι. Thus, parallelogram FECG, equal to the given triangle ABC, has been constructed in the angle CEF, which
is equal to D. (Which is) the very thing it was required
to do.
mgþ. Proposition 43
Παντὸς παραλληλογράμμου τῶν περὶ τὴν διάμετρον πα- For any parallelogram, the complements of the paralραλληλογράμμων τὰ παραπληρώματα ἴσα ἀλλήλοις ἐστίν. lelograms about the diagonal are equal to one another.
῎Εστω παραλληλόγραμμον τὸ ΑΒΓΔ, διάμετρος δὲ Let ABCD be a parallelogram, and AC its diagonal.
αὐτοῦ ἡ ΑΓ, περὶ δὲ τὴν ΑΓ παραλληλόγραμμα μὲν ἔστω And let EH and FG be the parallelograms about AC, and
τὰ ΕΘ, ΖΗ, τὰ δὲ λεγόμενα παραπληρώματα τὰ ΒΚ, ΚΔ· BK and KD the so-called complements (about AC). I
λέγω, ὅτι ἴσον ἐστὶ τὸ ΒΚ παραπλήρωμα τῷ ΚΔ παρα- say that the complement BK is equal to the complement
πληρώματι. KD.
᾿Επεὶ γὰρ παραλληλόγραμμόν ἐστι τὸ ΑΒΓΔ, διάμετρος For since ABCD is a parallelogram, and AC its diagoδὲ αὐτοῦ ἡ ΑΓ, ἴσον ἐστὶ τὸ ΑΒΓ τρίγωνον τῷ ΑΓΔ nal, triangle ABC is equal to triangle ACD [Prop. 1.34].
τριγώνῳ. πάλιν, ἐπεὶ παραλληλόγραμμόν ἐστι τὸ ΕΘ, Again, since EH is a parallelogram, and AK is its diagoδιάμετρος δὲ αὐτοῦ ἐστιν ἡ ΑΚ, ἴσον ἐστὶ τὸ ΑΕΚ τρίγωνον nal, triangle AEK is equal to triangle AHK [Prop. 1.34].
τῷ ΑΘΚ τριγώνῳ. διὰ τὰ αὐτὰ δὴ καὶ τὸ ΚΖΓ τρίγωνον So, for the same (reasons), triangle KFC is also equal to
τῷ ΚΗΓ ἐστιν ἴσον. ἐπεὶ οὖν τὸ μὲν ΑΕΚ τρίγωνον τῷ (triangle) KGC. Therefore, since triangle AEK is equal
ΑΘΚ τριγώνῳ ἐστὶν ἴσον, τὸ δὲ ΚΖΓ τῷ ΚΗΓ, τὸ ΑΕΚ to triangle AHK, and KFC to KGC, triangle AEK plus
τρίγωνον μετὰ τοῦ ΚΗΓ ἴσον ἐστὶ τῷ ΑΘΚ τριγώνῳ μετὰ KGC is equal to triangle AHK plus KFC. And the
τοῦ ΚΖΓ· ἔστι δὲ καὶ ὅλον τὸ ΑΒΓ τρίγωνον ὅλῳ τῷ ΑΔΓ whole triangle ABC is also equal to the whole (triangle)
ἴσον· λοιπὸν ἄρα τὸ ΒΚ παραπλήρωμα λοιπῷ τῷ ΚΔ παρα- ADC. Thus, the remaining complement BK is equal to
42
STOIQEIWN aþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 1
πληρώματί ἐστιν ἴσον. the remaining complement KD.
Ζ
Γ
Ε
Α Θ ∆
Β Η
Κ K
C
D
E
A H
B G
F
Παντὸς ἄρα παραλληλογράμμου χωρίου τῶν περὶ τὴν Thus, for any parallelogramic figure, the compleδιάμετρον παραλληλογράμμων τὰ παραπληρώματα ἴσα ἀλλή- ments of the parallelograms about the diagonal are equal
λοις ἐστίν· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. to one another. (Which is) the very thing it was required
to show.
mdþ. Proposition 44
Παρὰ τὴν δοθεῖσαν εὐθεῖαν τῷ δοθέντι τριγώνῳ ἴσον πα- To apply a parallelogram equal to a given triangle to
ραλληλόγραμμον παραβαλεῖν ἐν τῇ δοθείσῃ γωνίᾳ εὐθυγράμ- a given straight-line in a given rectilinear angle.
μῳ.
Κ
Γ
∆
Ζ Ε
Η Β
Θ Α Λ
Μ B
C
D
F E K
M
H A L
G
῎Εστω ἡ μὲν δοθεῖσα εὐθεῖα ἡ ΑΒ, τὸ δὲ δοθὲν τρίγωνον Let AB be the given straight-line, C the given trianτὸ Γ, ἡ δὲ δοθεῖσα γωνία εὐθύγραμμος ἡ Δ· δεῖ δὴ παρὰ gle, and D the given rectilinear angle. So it is required to
τὴν δοθεῖσαν εὐθεῖαν τὴν ΑΒ τῷ δοθέντι τριγώνῳ τῷ Γ apply a parallelogram equal to the given triangle C to the
ἴσον παραλληλόγραμμον παραβαλεῖν ἐν ἴσῃ τῇ Δ γωνίᾳ. given straight-line AB in an angle equal to (angle) D.
Συνεστάτω τῷ Γ τριγώνῳ ἴσον παραλληλόγραμμον τὸ Let the parallelogram BEFG, equal to the triangle C,
ΒΕΖΗ ἐν γωνίᾳ τῇ ὑπὸ ΕΒΗ, ἥ ἐστιν ἴση τῇ Δ· καὶ κείσθω have been constructed in the angle EBG, which is equal
ὥστε ἐπ᾿ εὐθείας εἶναι τὴν ΒΕ τῇ ΑΒ, καὶ διήχθω ἡ ΖΗ to D [Prop. 1.42]. And let it have been placed so that
ἐπὶ τὸ Θ, καὶ διὰ τοῦ Α ὁποτέρᾳ τῶν ΒΗ, ΕΖ παράλληλος BE is straight-on to AB.
† And let FG have been drawn
ἤχθω ἡ ΑΘ, καὶ ἐπεζεύχθω ἡ ΘΒ. καὶ ἐπεὶ εἰς παραλλήλους through to H, and let AH have been drawn through A
τὰς ΑΘ, ΕΖ εὐθεῖα ἐνέπεσεν ἡ ΘΖ, αἱ ἄρα ὑπὸ ΑΘΖ, ΘΖΕ parallel to either of BG or EF [Prop. 1.31], and let HB
γωνίαι δυσὶν ὀρθαῖς εἰσιν ἴσαι. αἱ ἄρα ὑπὸ ΒΘΗ, ΗΖΕ have been joined. And since the straight-line HF falls
δύο ὀρθῶν ἐλάσσονές εἰσιν· αἱ δὲ ἀπὸ ἐλασσόνων ἢ δύο across the parallels AH and EF, the (sum of the) anὀρθῶν εἰς ἄπειρον ἐκβαλλόμεναι συμπίπτουσιν· αἱ ΘΒ, ΖΕ gles AHF and HFE is thus equal to two right-angles
43
STOIQEIWN aþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 1
ἄρα ἐκβαλλόμεναι συμπεσοῦνται. ἐκβεβλήσθωσαν καὶ συμ- [Prop. 1.29]. Thus, (the sum of) BHG and GFE is less
πιπτέτωσαν κατὰ τὸ Κ, καὶ διὰ τοῦ Κ σημείου ὁποτέρᾳ than two right-angles. And (straight-lines) produced to
τῶν ΕΑ, ΖΘ παράλληλος ἤχθω ἡ ΚΛ, καὶ ἐκβεβλήσθωσαν infinity from (internal angles whose sum is) less than two
αἱ ΘΑ, ΗΒ ἐπὶ τὰ Λ, Μ σημεῖα. παραλληλόγραμμον ἄρα right-angles meet together [Post. 5]. Thus, being proἐστὶ τὸ ΘΛΚΖ, διάμετρος δὲ αὐτοῦ ἡ ΘΚ, περὶ δὲ τὴν ΘΚ duced, HB and FE will meet together. Let them have
παραλληλόγραμμα μὲν τὰ ΑΗ, ΜΕ, τὰ δὲ λεγόμενα παρα- been produced, and let them meet together at K. And let
πληρώματα τὰ ΛΒ, ΒΖ· ἴσον ἄρα ἐστὶ τὸ ΛΒ τῷ ΒΖ. ἀλλὰ KL have been drawn through point K parallel to either
τὸ ΒΖ τῷ Γ τριγώνῳ ἐστὶν ἴσον· καὶ τὸ ΛΒ ἄρα τῷ Γ ἐστιν of EA or FH [Prop. 1.31]. And let HA and GB have
ἴσον. καὶ ἐπεὶ ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ὑπὸ ΗΒΕ γωνία τῇ ὑπὸ ΑΒΜ, been produced to points L and M (respectively). Thus,
ἀλλὰ ἡ ὑπὸ ΗΒΕ τῇ Δ ἐστιν ἴση, καὶ ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΒΜ ἄρα τῇ Δ HLKF is a parallelogram, and HK its diagonal. And
γωνίᾳ ἐστὶν ἴση. AG and ME (are) parallelograms, and LB and BF the
Παρὰ τὴν δοθεῖσαν ἄρα εὐθεῖαν τὴν ΑΒ τῷ δοθέντι so-called complements, about HK. Thus, LB is equal to
τριγώνῳ τῷ Γ ἴσον παραλληλόγραμμον παραβέβληται τὸ ΛΒ BF [Prop. 1.43]. But, BF is equal to triangle C. Thus,
ἐν γωνίᾳ τῇ ὑπὸ ΑΒΜ, ἥ ἐστιν ἴση τῇ Δ· ὅπερ ἔδει ποιῆσαι. LB is also equal to C. Also, since angle GBE is equal to
ABM [Prop. 1.15], but GBE is equal to D, ABM is thus
also equal to angle D.
Thus, the parallelogram LB, equal to the given triangle C, has been applied to the given straight-line AB in
the angle ABM, which is equal to D. (Which is) the very
thing it was required to do.
† This can be achieved using Props. 1.3, 1.23, and 1.31.
meþ. Proposition 45
Τῷ δοθέντι εὐθυγράμμῳ ἴσον παραλληλόγραμμον συστ- To construct a parallelogram equal to a given rectilinήσασθαι ἐν τῇ δοθείσῃ γωνίᾳ εὐθυγράμμῳ. ear figure in a given rectilinear angle.
῎Εστω τὸ μὲν δοθὲν εὐθύγραμμον τὸ ΑΒΓΔ, ἡ δὲ Let ABCD be the given rectilinear figure,† and E the
δοθεῖσα γωνία εὐθύγραμμος ἡ Ε· δεῖ δὴ τῷ ΑΒΓΔ εὐθυ- given rectilinear angle. So it is required to construct a
γράμμῳ ἴσον παραλληλόγραμμον συστήσασθαι ἐν τῇ δοθείσῃ parallelogram equal to the rectilinear figure ABCD in
γωνίᾳ τῇ Ε. the given angle E.
᾿Επεζεύχθω ἡ ΔΒ, καὶ συνεστάτω τῷ ΑΒΔ τριγώνῳ Let DB have been joined, and let the parallelogram
ἴσον παραλληλόγραμμον τὸ ΖΘ ἐν τῇ ὑπὸ ΘΚΖ γωνίᾳ, ἥ FH, equal to the triangle ABD, have been constructed
ἐστιν ἴση τῇ Ε· καὶ παραβεβλήσθω παρὰ τὴν ΗΘ εὐθεῖαν τῷ in the angle HKF, which is equal to E [Prop. 1.42]. And
ΔΒΓ τριγώνῳ ἴσον παραλληλόγραμμον τὸ ΗΜ ἐν τῇ ὑπὸ let the parallelogram GM, equal to the triangle DBC,
ΗΘΜ γωνίᾳ, ἥ ἐστιν ἴση τῇ Ε. καὶ ἐπεὶ ἡ Ε γωνία ἑκατέρᾳ have been applied to the straight-line GH in the angle
τῶν ὑπὸ ΘΚΖ, ΗΘΜ ἐστιν ἴση, καὶ ἡ ὑπὸ ΘΚΖ ἄρα τῇ ὑπὸ GHM, which is equal to E [Prop. 1.44]. And since angle
ΗΘΜ ἐστιν ἴση. κοινὴ προσκείσθω ἡ ὑπὸ ΚΘΗ· αἱ ἄρα E is equal to each of (angles) HKF and GHM, (anὑπὸ ΖΚΘ, ΚΘΗ ταῖς ὑπὸ ΚΘΗ, ΗΘΜ ἴσαι εἰσίν. ἀλλ᾿ αἱ gle) HKF is thus also equal to GHM. Let KHG have
ὑπὸ ΖΚΘ, ΚΘΗ δυσὶν ὀρθαῖς ἴσαι εἰσίν· καὶ αἱ ὑπὸ ΚΘΗ, been added to both. Thus, (the sum of) FKH and KHG
ΗΘΜ ἄρα δύο ὀρθαῖς ἴσαι εἰσίν. πρὸς δή τινι εὐθεῖᾳ τῇ ΗΘ is equal to (the sum of) KHG and GHM. But, (the
καὶ τῷ πρὸς αὐτῇ σημείῳ τῷ Θ δύο εὐθεῖαι αἱ ΚΘ, ΘΜ μὴ sum of) FKH and KHG is equal to two right-angles
ἐπὶ τὰ αὐτὰ μέρη κείμεναι τὰς ἐφεξῆς γωνίας δύο ὀρθαῖς [Prop. 1.29]. Thus, (the sum of) KHG and GHM is
ἴσας ποιοῦσιν· ἐπ᾿ εὐθείας ἄρα ἐστὶν ἡ ΚΘ τῇ ΘΜ· καὶ also equal to two right-angles. So two straight-lines, KH
ἐπεὶ εἰς παραλλήλους τὰς ΚΜ, ΖΗ εὐθεῖα ἐνέπεσεν ἡ ΘΗ, and HM, not lying on the same side, make adjacent anαἱ ἐναλλὰξ γωνίαι αἱ ὑπὸ ΜΘΗ, ΘΗΖ ἴσαι ἀλλήλαις εἰσίν. gles with some straight-line GH, at the point H on it,
κοινὴ προσκείσθω ἡ ὑπὸ ΘΗΛ· αἱ ἄρα ὑπὸ ΜΘΗ, ΘΗΛ ταῖς (whose sum is) equal to two right-angles. Thus, KH is
ὑπὸ ΘΗΖ, ΘΗΛ ἴσαι εἰσιν. ἀλλ᾿ αἱ ὑπὸ ΜΘΗ, ΘΗΛ δύο straight-on to HM [Prop. 1.14]. And since the straightὀρθαῖς ἴσαι εἰσίν· καὶ αἱ ὑπὸ ΘΗΖ, ΘΗΛ ἄρα δύο ὀρθαῖς line HG falls across the parallels KM and FG, the alἴσαι εἰσίν· ἐπ᾿ εὐθείας ἄρα ἐστὶν ἡ ΖΗ τῇ ΗΛ. καὶ ἐπεὶ ἡ ternate angles MHG and HGF are equal to one another
ΖΚ τῇ ΘΗ ἴση τε καὶ παράλληλός ἐστιν, ἀλλὰ καὶ ἡ ΘΗ τῇ [Prop. 1.29]. Let HGL have been added to both. Thus,
ΜΛ, καὶ ἡ ΚΖ ἄρα τῇ ΜΛ ἴση τε καὶ παράλληλός ἐστιν· καὶ (the sum of) MHG and HGL is equal to (the sum of)
44
STOIQEIWN aþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 1
ἐπιζευγνύουσιν αὐτὰς εὐθεῖαι αἱ ΚΜ, ΖΛ· καὶ αἱ ΚΜ, ΖΛ HGF and HGL. But, (the sum of) MHG and HGL is
ἄρα ἴσαι τε καὶ παράλληλοί εἰσιν· παραλληλόγραμμον ἄρα equal to two right-angles [Prop. 1.29]. Thus, (the sum of)
ἐστὶ τὸ ΚΖΛΜ. καὶ ἐπεὶ ἴσον ἐστὶ τὸ μὲν ΑΒΔ τρίγωνον HGF and HGL is also equal to two right-angles. Thus,
τῷ ΖΘ παραλληλογράμμῳ, τὸ δὲ ΔΒΓ τῷ ΗΜ, ὅλον ἄρα FG is straight-on to GL [Prop. 1.14]. And since FK is
τὸ ΑΒΓΔ εὐθύγραμμον ὅλῳ τῷ ΚΖΛΜ παραλληλογράμμῳ equal and parallel to HG [Prop. 1.34], but also HG to
ἐστὶν ἴσον. ML [Prop. 1.34], KF is thus also equal and parallel to
ML [Prop. 1.30]. And the straight-lines KM and FL
join them. Thus, KM and FL are equal and parallel as
well [Prop. 1.33]. Thus, KFLM is a parallelogram. And
since triangle ABD is equal to parallelogram FH, and
DBC to GM, the whole rectilinear figure ABCD is thus
equal to the whole parallelogram KFLM.
Λ
Ε
Γ
∆
Α
Β
Η
Κ Θ Μ
Ζ F
A
D
B
C
E
K H
G
M
L
Τῷ ἄρα δοθέντι εὐθυγράμμῳ τῷ ΑΒΓΔ ἴσον παραλ- Thus, the parallelogram KFLM, equal to the given
ληλόγραμμον συνέσταται τὸ ΚΖΛΜ ἐν γωνίᾳ τῇ ὑπὸ ΖΚΜ, rectilinear figure ABCD, has been constructed in the anἥ ἐστιν ἴση τῇ δοθείσῃ τῇ Ε· ὅπερ ἔδει ποιῆσαι. gle FKM, which is equal to the given (angle) E. (Which
is) the very thing it was required to do.
† The proof is only given for a four-sided figure. However, the extension to many-sided figures is trivial.
mþ. Proposition 46
᾿Απὸ τῆς δοθείσης εὐθείας τετράγωνον ἀναγράψαι. To describe a square on a given straight-line.
῎Εστω ἡ δοθεῖσα εὐθεῖα ἡ ΑΒ· δεῖ δὴ ἀπὸ τῆς ΑΒ Let AB be the given straight-line. So it is required to
εὐθείας τετράγωνον ἀναγράψαι. describe a square on the straight-line AB.
῎Ηχθω τῇ ΑΒ εὐθείᾳ ἀπὸ τοῦ πρὸς αὐτῇ σημείου τοῦ Let AC have been drawn at right-angles to the
Α πρὸς ὀρθὰς ἡ ΑΓ, καὶ κείσθω τῇ ΑΒ ἴση ἡ ΑΔ· καὶ διὰ straight-line AB from the point A on it [Prop. 1.11],
μὲν τοῦ Δ σημείου τῇ ΑΒ παράλληλος ἤχθω ἡ ΔΕ, διὰ and let AD have been made equal to AB [Prop. 1.3].
δὲ τοῦ Β σημείου τῇ ΑΔ παράλληλος ἤχθω ἡ ΒΕ. παραλ- And let DE have been drawn through point D parallel to
ληλόγραμμον ἄρα ἐστὶ τὸ ΑΔΕΒ· ἴση ἄρα ἐστὶν ἡ μὲν ΑΒ AB [Prop. 1.31], and let BE have been drawn through
τῇ ΔΕ, ἡ δὲ ΑΔ τῇ ΒΕ. ἀλλὰ ἡ ΑΒ τῇ ΑΔ ἐστιν ἴση· point B parallel to AD [Prop. 1.31]. Thus, ADEB is a
αἱ τέσσαρες ἄρα αἱ ΒΑ, ΑΔ, ΔΕ, ΕΒ ἴσαι ἀλλήλαις εἰσίν· parallelogram. Therefore, AB is equal to DE, and AD to
ἰσόπλευρον ἄρα ἐστὶ τὸ ΑΔΕΒ παραλληλόγραμμον. λέγω BE [Prop. 1.34]. But, AB is equal to AD. Thus, the four
δή, ὅτι καὶ ὀρθογώνιον. ἐπεὶ γὰρ εἰς παραλλήλους τὰς ΑΒ, (sides) BA, AD, DE, and EB are equal to one another.
ΔΕ εὐθεῖα ἐνέπεσεν ἡ ΑΔ, αἱ ἄρα ὑπὸ ΒΑΔ, ΑΔΕ γωνίαι Thus, the parallelogram ADEB is equilateral. So I say
δύο ὀρθαῖς ἴσαι εἰσίν. ὀρθὴ δὲ ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΑΔ· ὀρθὴ ἄρα καὶ that (it is) also right-angled. For since the straight-line
45
STOIQEIWN aþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 1
ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΔΕ. τῶν δὲ παραλληλογράμμων χωρίων αἱ ἀπε- AD falls across the parallels AB and DE, the (sum of
ναντίον πλευραί τε καὶ γωνίαι ἴσαι ἀλλήλαις εἰσίν· ὀρθὴ ἄρα the) angles BAD and ADE is equal to two right-angles
καὶ ἑκατέρα τῶν ἀπεναντίον τῶν ὑπὸ ΑΒΕ, ΒΕΔ γωνιῶν· [Prop. 1.29]. But BAD (is a) right-angle. Thus, ADE
ὀρθογώνιον ἄρα ἐστὶ τὸ ΑΔΕΒ. ἐδείχθη δὲ καὶ ἰσόπλευρον. (is) also a right-angle. And for parallelogrammic figures,
the opposite sides and angles are equal to one another
[Prop. 1.34]. Thus, each of the opposite angles ABE
and BED (are) also right-angles. Thus, ADEB is rightangled. And it was also shown (to be) equilateral.
Α Β
∆
Γ
Ε D
C
E
A B
Τετράγωνον ἄρα ἐστίν· καί ἐστιν ἀπὸ τῆς ΑΒ εὐθείας Thus, (ADEB) is a square [Def. 1.22]. And it is deἀναγεγραμμένον· ὅπερ ἔδει ποιῆσαι. scribed on the straight-line AB. (Which is) the very thing
it was required to do.
mzþ. Proposition 47
᾿Εν τοῖς ὀρθογωνίοις τριγώνοις τὸ ἀπὸ τῆς τὴν ὀρθὴν In right-angled triangles, the square on the side subγωνίαν ὑποτεινούσης πλευρᾶς τετράγωνον ἴσον ἐστὶ τοῖς tending the right-angle is equal to the (sum of the)
ἀπὸ τῶν τὴν ὀρθὴν γωνίαν περιεχουσῶν πλευρῶν τε- squares on the sides containing the right-angle.
τραγώνοις. Let ABC be a right-angled triangle having the angle
῎Εστω τρίγωνον ὀρθογώνιον τὸ ΑΒΓ ὀρθὴν ἔχον τὴν BACa right-angle. I say that the square on BC is equal
ὑπὸ ΒΑΓ γωνίαν· λέγω, ὅτι τὸ ἀπὸ τῆς ΒΓ τετράγωνον to the (sum of the) squares on BA and AC.
ἴσον ἐστὶ τοῖς ἀπὸ τῶν ΒΑ, ΑΓ τετραγώνοις. For let the square BDEC have been described on
᾿Αναγεγράφθω γὰρ ἀπὸ μὲν τῆς ΒΓ τετράγωνον τὸ BC, and (the squares) GB and HC on AB and AC
ΒΔΕΓ, ἀπὸ δὲ τῶν ΒΑ, ΑΓ τὰ ΗΒ, ΘΓ, καὶ διὰ τοῦ (respectively) [Prop. 1.46]. And let AL have been
Α ὁποτέρᾳ τῶν ΒΔ, ΓΕ παράλληλος ἤχθω ἡ ΑΛ· καὶ drawn through point A parallel to either of BD or CE
ἐπεζεύχθωσαν αἱ ΑΔ, ΖΓ. καὶ ἐπεὶ ὀρθή ἐστιν ἑκατέρα [Prop. 1.31]. And let AD and FC have been joined. And
τῶν ὑπὸ ΒΑΓ, ΒΑΗ γωνιῶν, πρὸς δή τινι εὐθείᾳ τῇ ΒΑ since angles BAC and BAG are each right-angles, then
καὶ τῷ πρὸς αὐτῇ σημείῳ τῷ Α δύο εὐθεῖαι αἱ ΑΓ, ΑΗ μὴ two straight-lines AC and AG, not lying on the same
ἐπὶ τὰ αὐτὰ μέρη κείμεναι τὰς ἐφεξῆς γωνίας δυσὶν ὀρθαῖς side, make the adjacent angles with some straight-line
ἴσας ποιοῦσιν· ἐπ᾿ εὐθείας ἄρα ἐστὶν ἡ ΓΑ τῇ ΑΗ. διὰ τὰ BA, at the point A on it, (whose sum is) equal to two
αὐτὰ δὴ καὶ ἡ ΒΑ τῇ ΑΘ ἐστιν ἐπ᾿ εὐθείας. καὶ ἐπεὶ ἴση right-angles. Thus, CA is straight-on to AG [Prop. 1.14].
ἐστὶν ἡ ὑπὸ ΔΒΓ γωνία τῇ ὑπὸ ΖΒΑ· ὀρθὴ γὰρ ἑκατέρα· So, for the same (reasons), BA is also straight-on to AH.
κοινὴ προσκείσθω ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΒΓ· ὅλη ἄρα ἡ ὑπὸ ΔΒΑ ὅλῃ τῇ And since angle DBC is equal to FBA, for (they are)
ὑπὸ ΖΒΓ ἐστιν ἴση. καὶ ἐπεὶ ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ μὲν ΔΒ τῇ ΒΓ, ἡ both right-angles, let ABC have been added to both.
δὲ ΖΒ τῇ ΒΑ, δύο δὴ αἱ ΔΒ, ΒΑ δύο ταῖς ΖΒ, ΒΓ ἴσαι εἰσὶν Thus, the whole (angle) DBA is equal to the whole (anἑκατέρα ἑκατέρᾳ· καὶ γωνία ἡ ὑπὸ ΔΒΑ γωνίᾳ τῇ ὑπὸ ΖΒΓ gle) FBC. And since DB is equal to BC, and FB to
ἴση· βάσις ἄρα ἡ ΑΔ βάσει τῇ ΖΓ [ἐστιν] ἴση, καὶ τὸ ΑΒΔ BA, the two (straight-lines) DB, BA are equal to the
46
STOIQEIWN aþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 1
τρίγωνον τῷ ΖΒΓ τριγώνῳ ἐστὶν ἴσον· καί [ἐστι] τοῦ μὲν two (straight-lines) CB, BF,
†
respectively. And angle
ΑΒΔ τριγώνου διπλάσιον τὸ ΒΛ παραλληλόγραμμον· βάσιν DBA (is) equal to angle FBC. Thus, the base AD [is]
τε γὰρ τὴν αὐτὴν ἔχουσι τὴν ΒΔ καὶ ἐν ταῖς αὐταῖς εἰσι equal to the base FC, and the triangle ABD is equal to
παραλλήλοις ταῖς ΒΔ, ΑΛ· τοῦ δὲ ΖΒΓ τριγώνου διπλάσιον the triangle FBC [Prop. 1.4]. And parallelogram BL
τὸ ΗΒ τετράγωνον· βάσιν τε γὰρ πάλιν τὴν αὐτὴν ἔχουσι [is] double (the area) of triangle ABD. For they have
τὴν ΖΒ καὶ ἐν ταῖς αὐταῖς εἰσι παραλλήλοις ταῖς ΖΒ, ΗΓ. the same base, BD, and are between the same parallels,
[τὰ δὲ τῶν ἴσων διπλάσια ἴσα ἀλλήλοις ἐστίν·] ἴσον ἄρα ἐστὶ BD and AL [Prop. 1.41]. And square GB is double (the
καὶ τὸ ΒΛ παραλληλόγραμμον τῷ ΗΒ τετραγώνῳ. ὁμοίως area) of triangle FBC. For again they have the same
δὴ ἐπιζευγνυμένων τῶν ΑΕ, ΒΚ δειχθήσεται καὶ τὸ ΓΛ base, FB, and are between the same parallels, FB and
παραλληλόγραμμον ἴσον τῷ ΘΓ τετραγώνῳ· ὅλον ἄρα τὸ GC [Prop. 1.41]. [And the doubles of equal things are
ΒΔΕΓ τετράγωνον δυσὶ τοῖς ΗΒ, ΘΓ τετραγώνοις ἴσον equal to one another.]‡ Thus, the parallelogram BL is
ἐστίν. καί ἐστι τὸ μὲν ΒΔΕΓ τετράγωνον ἀπὸ τῆς ΒΓ ἀνα- also equal to the square GB. So, similarly, AE and BK
γραφέν, τὰ δὲ ΗΒ, ΘΓ ἀπὸ τῶν ΒΑ, ΑΓ. τὸ ἄρα ἀπὸ τῆς being joined, the parallelogram CL can be shown (to
ΒΓ πλευρᾶς τετράγωνον ἴσον ἐστὶ τοῖς ἀπὸ τῶν ΒΑ, ΑΓ be) equal to the square HC. Thus, the whole square
πλευρῶν τετραγώνοις. BDEC is equal to the (sum of the) two squares GB and
HC. And the square BDEC is described on BC, and
the (squares) GB and HC on BA and AC (respectively).
Thus, the square on the side BC is equal to the (sum of
the) squares on the sides BA and AC.
Η
Κ
Γ
Ζ
∆ Λ Ε
Β
Θ
Α
F
H
K
A
B C
G
D L E
᾿Εν ἄρα τοῖς ὀρθογωνίοις τριγώνοις τὸ ἀπὸ τῆς τὴν Thus, in right-angled triangles, the square on the
ὀρθὴν γωνίαν ὑποτεινούσης πλευρᾶς τετράγωνον ἴσον ἐστὶ side subtending the right-angle is equal to the (sum of
τοῖς ἀπὸ τῶν τὴν ὀρθὴν [γωνίαν] περιεχουσῶν πλευρῶν τε- the) squares on the sides surrounding the right-[angle].
τραγώνοις· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. (Which is) the very thing it was required to show.
† The Greek text has “F B, BC”, which is obviously a mistake.
‡ This is an additional common notion.
47
STOIQEIWN aþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 1
mhþ. Proposition 48
᾿Εὰν τριγώνου τὸ ἀπὸ μιᾶς τῶν πλευρῶν τετράγωνον If the square on one of the sides of a triangle is equal
ἴσον ᾖ τοῖς ἀπὸ τῶν λοιπῶν τοῦ τριγώνου δύο πλευρῶν to the (sum of the) squares on the two remaining sides of
τετραγώνοις, ἡ περιεχομένη γωνία ὑπὸ τῶν λοιπῶν τοῦ the triangle then the angle contained by the two remainτριγώνου δύο πλευρῶν ὀρθή ἐστιν. ing sides of the triangle is a right-angle.
Α Β
Γ
∆ D A B
C
Τριγώνου γὰρ τοῦ ΑΒΓ τὸ ἀπὸ μιᾶς τῆς ΒΓ πλευρᾶς For let the square on one of the sides, BC, of triangle
τετράγωνον ἴσον ἔστω τοῖς ἀπὸ τῶν ΒΑ, ΑΓ πλευρῶν τε- ABC be equal to the (sum of the) squares on the sides
τραγώνοις· λέγω, ὅτι ὀρθή ἐστιν ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΑΓ γωνία. BA and AC. I say that angle BAC is a right-angle.
῎Ηχθω γὰρ ἀπὸ τοῦ Α σημείου τῇ ΑΓ εὐθείᾳ πρὸς ὀρθὰς For let AD have been drawn from point A at rightἡ ΑΔ καὶ κείσθω τῇ ΒΑ ἴση ἡ ΑΔ, καὶ ἐπεζεύχθω ἡ ΔΓ. angles to the straight-line AC [Prop. 1.11], and let AD
ἐπεὶ ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ΔΑ τῇ ΑΒ, ἴσον ἐστὶ καὶ τὸ ἀπὸ τῆς have been made equal to BA [Prop. 1.3], and let DC
ΔΑ τετράγωνον τῷ ἀπὸ τῆς ΑΒ τετραγώνῳ. κοινὸν προ- have been joined. Since DA is equal to AB, the square
σκείσθω τὸ ἀπὸ τῆς ΑΓ τετράγωνον· τὰ ἄρα ἀπὸ τῶν ΔΑ, on DA is thus also equal to the square on AB.
† Let the
ΑΓ τετράγωνα ἴσα ἐστὶ τοῖς ἀπὸ τῶν ΒΑ, ΑΓ τετραγώνοις. square on AC have been added to both. Thus, the (sum
ἀλλὰ τοῖς μὲν ἀπὸ τῶν ΔΑ, ΑΓ ἴσον ἐστὶ τὸ ἀπὸ τῆς ΔΓ· of the) squares on DA and AC is equal to the (sum of
ὀρθὴ γάρ ἐστιν ἡ ὑπὸ ΔΑΓ γωνία· τοῖς δὲ ἀπὸ τῶν ΒΑ, the) squares on BA and AC. But, the (square) on DC is
ΑΓ ἴσον ἐστὶ τὸ ἀπὸ τῆς ΒΓ· ὑπόκειται γάρ· τὸ ἄρα ἀπὸ equal to the (sum of the squares) on DA and AC. For anτῆς ΔΓ τετράγωνον ἴσον ἐστὶ τῷ ἀπὸ τῆς ΒΓ τετραγώνῳ· gle DAC is a right-angle [Prop. 1.47]. But, the (square)
ὥστε καὶ πλευρὰ ἡ ΔΓ τῇ ΒΓ ἐστιν ἴση· καὶ ἐπεὶ ἴση ἐστὶν on BC is equal to (sum of the squares) on BA and AC.
ἡ ΔΑ τῇ ΑΒ, κοινὴ δὲ ἡ ΑΓ, δύο δὴ αἱ ΔΑ, ΑΓ δύο ταῖς For (that) was assumed. Thus, the square on DC is equal
ΒΑ, ΑΓ ἴσαι εἰσίν· καὶ βάσις ἡ ΔΓ βάσει τῇ ΒΓ ἴση· γωνία to the square on BC. So side DC is also equal to (side)
ἄρα ἡ ὑπὸ ΔΑΓ γωνίᾳ τῇ ὑπὸ ΒΑΓ [ἐστιν] ἴση. ὀρθὴ δὲ ἡ BC. And since DA is equal to AB, and AC (is) comὑπὸ ΔΑΓ· ὀρθὴ ἄρα καὶ ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΑΓ. mon, the two (straight-lines) DA, AC are equal to the
᾿Εὰν ἀρὰ τριγώνου τὸ ἀπὸ μιᾶς τῶν πλευρῶν τετράγωνον two (straight-lines) BA, AC. And the base DC is equal
ἴσον ᾖ τοῖς ἀπὸ τῶν λοιπῶν τοῦ τριγώνου δύο πλευρῶν to the base BC. Thus, angle DAC [is] equal to angle
τετραγώνοις, ἡ περιεχομένη γωνία ὑπὸ τῶν λοιπῶν τοῦ BAC [Prop. 1.8]. But DAC is a right-angle. Thus, BAC
τριγώνου δύο πλευρῶν ὀρθή ἐστιν· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. is also a right-angle.
Thus, if the square on one of the sides of a triangle is
equal to the (sum of the) squares on the remaining two
sides of the triangle then the angle contained by the remaining two sides of the triangle is a right-angle. (Which
is) the very thing it was required to show.
† Here, use is made of the additional common notion that the squares of equal things are themselves equal. Later on, the inverse notion is used.
48
ELEMENTS BOOK 2
Fundamentals of Geometric Algebra
49
STOIQEIWN bþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 2
VOroi. Definitions
αʹ. Πᾶν παραλληλόγραμμον ὀρθογώνιον περιέχεσθαι 1. Any rectangular parallelogram is said to be conλέγεται ὑπὸ δύο τῶν τὴν ὀρθὴν γωνίαν περιεχουσῶν tained by the two straight-lines containing the rightεὐθειῶν. angle.
βʹ. Παντὸς δὲ παραλληλογράμμου χωρίου τῶν περὶ τὴν 2. And in any parallelogrammic figure, let any one
διάμετρον αὐτοῦ παραλληλογράμμων ἓν ὁποιονοῦν σὺν τοῖς whatsoever of the parallelograms about its diagonal,
δυσὶ παραπληρώμασι γνώμων καλείσθω. (taken) with its two complements, be called a gnomon.
aþ. Proposition 1†
᾿Εὰν ὦσι δύο εὐθεῖαι, τμηθῇ δὲ ἡ ἑτέρα αὐτῶν εἰς ὁσα- If there are two straight-lines, and one of them is cut
δηποτοῦν τμήματα, τὸ περιεχόμενον ὀρθογώνιον ὑπὸ τῶν into any number of pieces whatsoever, then the rectangle
δύο εὐθειῶν ἴσον ἐστὶ τοῖς ὑπό τε τῆς ἀτμήτου καὶ ἑκάστου contained by the two straight-lines is equal to the (sum
τῶν τμημάτων περιεχομένοις ὀρθογωνίοις. of the) rectangles contained by the uncut (straight-line),
and every one of the pieces (of the cut straight-line).
Θ
Ε
Λ
Α
Η
Ζ
Β ∆
Κ
Γ
H
A
B D E C
G
F
K L
῎Εστωσαν δύο εὐθεῖαι αἱ Α, ΒΓ, καὶ τετμήσθω ἡ ΒΓ, Let A and BC be the two straight-lines, and let BC
ὡς ἔτυχεν, κατὰ τὰ Δ, Ε σημεῖα· λέγω, ὅτι τὸ ὑπὸ τῶν Α, be cut, at random, at points D and E. I say that the rectΒΓ περιεχομένον ὀρθογώνιον ἴσον ἐστὶ τῷ τε ὑπὸ τῶν Α, angle contained by A and BC is equal to the rectangle(s)
ΒΔ περιεχομένῳ ὀρθογωνίῳ καὶ τῷ ὑπὸ τῶν Α, ΔΕ καὶ ἔτι contained by A and BD, by A and DE, and, finally, by A
τῷ ὑπὸ τῶν Α, ΕΓ. and EC.
῎Ηχθω γὰρ ἀπὸ τοῦ Β τῇ ΒΓ πρὸς ὀρθὰς ἡ ΒΖ, καὶ For let BF have been drawn from point B, at rightκείσθω τῇ Α ἴση ἡ ΒΗ, καὶ διὰ μὲν τοῦ Η τῇ ΒΓ παράλληλος angles to BC [Prop. 1.11], and let BG be made equal
ἤχθω ἡ ΗΘ, διὰ δὲ τῶν Δ, Ε, Γ τῇ ΒΗ παράλληλοι ἤχθωσαν to A [Prop. 1.3], and let GH have been drawn through
αἱ ΔΚ, ΕΛ, ΓΘ. (point) G, parallel to BC [Prop. 1.31], and let DK, EL,
῎Ισον δή ἐστι τὸ ΒΘ τοῖς ΒΚ, ΔΛ, ΕΘ. καί ἐστι τὸ and CH have been drawn through (points) D, E, and C
μὲν ΒΘ τὸ ὑπὸ τῶν Α, ΒΓ· περιέχεται μὲν γὰρ ὑπὸ τῶν (respectively), parallel to BG [Prop. 1.31].
ΗΒ, ΒΓ, ἴση δὲ ἡ ΒΗ τῇ Α· τὸ δὲ ΒΚ τὸ ὑπὸ τῶν Α, ΒΔ· So the (rectangle) BH is equal to the (rectangles)
περιέχεται μὲν γὰρ ὑπὸ τῶν ΗΒ, ΒΔ, ἴση δὲ ἡ ΒΗ τῇ Α. τὸ BK, DL, and EH. And BH is the (rectangle contained)
δὲ ΔΛ τὸ ὑπὸ τῶν Α, ΔΕ· ἴση γὰρ ἡ ΔΚ, τουτέστιν ἡ ΒΗ, by A and BC. For it is contained by GB and BC, and BG
τῇ Α. καὶ ἔτι ὁμοίως τὸ ΕΘ τὸ ὑπὸ τῶν Α, ΕΓ· τὸ ἄρα ὑπὸ (is) equal to A. And BK (is) the (rectangle contained) by
τῶν Α, ΒΓ ἴσον ἐστὶ τῷ τε ὑπὸ Α, ΒΔ καὶ τῷ ὑπὸ Α, ΔΕ A and BD. For it is contained by GB and BD, and BG
καὶ ἔτι τῷ ὑπὸ Α, ΕΓ. (is) equal to A. And DL (is) the (rectangle contained) by
᾿Εὰν ἄρα ὦσι δύο εὐθεῖαι, τμηθῇ δὲ ἡ ἑτέρα αὐτῶν εἰς A and DE. For DK, that is to say BG [Prop. 1.34], (is)
ὁσαδηποτοῦν τμήματα, τὸ περιεχόμενον ὀρθογώνιον ὑπὸ equal to A. Similarly, EH (is) also the (rectangle conτῶν δύο εὐθειῶν ἴσον ἐστὶ τοῖς ὑπό τε τῆς ἀτμήτου καὶ tained) by A and EC. Thus, the (rectangle contained)
ἑκάστου τῶν τμημάτων περιεχομένοις ὀρθογωνίοις· ὅπερ by A and BC is equal to the (rectangles contained) by A
50
STOIQEIWN bþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 2
ἔδει δεῖξαι. and BD, by A and DE, and, finally, by A and EC.
Thus, if there are two straight-lines, and one of them
is cut into any number of pieces whatsoever, then the
rectangle contained by the two straight-lines is equal
to the (sum of the) rectangles contained by the uncut
(straight-line), and every one of the pieces (of the cut
straight-line). (Which is) the very thing it was required
to show.
† This proposition is a geometric version of the algebraic identity: a (b + c + d + · · · ) = a b + a c + a d + · · · .
bþ. Proposition 2†
᾿Εὰν εὐθεῖα γραμμὴ τμηθῇ, ὡς ἔτυχεν, τὸ ὑπὸ τῆς ὅλης If a straight-line is cut at random then the (sum of
καὶ ἑκατέρου τῶν τμημάτων περιεχόμενον ὀρθογώνιον ἴσον the) rectangle(s) contained by the whole (straight-line),
ἐστὶ τῷ ἀπὸ τῆς ὅλης τετραγώνῳ. and each of the pieces (of the straight-line), is equal to
the square on the whole.
Α Γ
∆
Β
Ζ Ε
A C B
D F E
Εὐθεῖα γὰρ ἡ ΑΒ τετμήσθω, ὡς ἔτυχεν, κατὰ τὸ Γ For let the straight-line AB have been cut, at random,
σημεῖον· λέγω, ὅτι τὸ ὑπὸ τῶν ΑΒ, ΒΓ περιεχόμενον at point C. I say that the rectangle contained by AB and
ὀρθογώνιον μετὰ τοῦ ὑπὸ ΒΑ, ΑΓ περιεχομένου ὀρθο- BC, plus the rectangle contained by BA and AC, is equal
γωνίου ἴσον ἐστὶ τῷ ἀπὸ τῆς ΑΒ τετραγώνῳ. to the square on AB.
᾿Αναγεγράφθω γὰρ ἀπὸ τῆς ΑΒ τετράγωνον τὸ ΑΔΕΒ, For let the square ADEB have been described on AB
καὶ ἤχθω διὰ τοῦ Γ ὁποτέρᾳ τῶν ΑΔ, ΒΕ παράλληλος ἡ [Prop. 1.46], and let CF have been drawn through C,
ΓΖ. parallel to either of AD or BE [Prop. 1.31].
῎Ισον δή ἐστὶ τὸ ΑΕ τοῖς ΑΖ, ΓΕ. καί ἐστι τὸ μὲν ΑΕ So the (square) AE is equal to the (rectangles) AF
τὸ ἀπὸ τῆς ΑΒ τετράγωνον, τὸ δὲ ΑΖ τὸ ὑπὸ τῶν ΒΑ, and CE. And AE is the square on AB. And AF (is) the
ΑΓ περιεχόμενον ὀρθογώνιον· περιέχεται μὲν γὰρ ὑπὸ τῶν rectangle contained by the (straight-lines) BA and AC.
ΔΑ, ΑΓ, ἴση δὲ ἡ ΑΔ τῇ ΑΒ· τὸ δὲ ΓΕ τὸ ὑπὸ τῶν ΑΒ, For it is contained by DA and AC, and AD (is) equal to
ΒΓ· ἴση γὰρ ἡ ΒΕ τῇ ΑΒ. τὸ ἄρα ὑπὸ τῶν ΒΑ, ΑΓ μετὰ AB. And CE (is) the (rectangle contained) by AB and
τοῦ ὑπὸ τῶν ΑΒ, ΒΓ ἴσον ἐστὶ τῷ ἀπὸ τῆς ΑΒ τετραγώνῳ. BC. For BE (is) equal to AB. Thus, the (rectangle con-
᾿Εὰν ἄρα εὐθεῖα γραμμὴ τμηθῇ, ὡς ἔτυχεν, τὸ ὑπὸ τῆς tained) by BA and AC, plus the (rectangle contained) by
ὅλης καὶ ἑκατέρου τῶν τμημάτων περιεχόμενον ὀρθογώνιον AB and BC, is equal to the square on AB.
ἴσον ἐστὶ τῷ ἀπὸ τῆς ὅλης τετραγώνῳ· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. Thus, if a straight-line is cut at random then the (sum
of the) rectangle(s) contained by the whole (straightline), and each of the pieces (of the straight-line), is equal
to the square on the whole. (Which is) the very thing it
was required to show.
51
STOIQEIWN bþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 2
† This proposition is a geometric version of the algebraic identity: a b + a c = a
2
if a = b + c.
gþ. Proposition 3†
᾿Εὰν εὐθεῖα γραμμὴ τμηθῇ, ὡς ἔτυχεν, τὸ ὑπὸ τῆς ὅλης If a straight-line is cut at random then the rectangle
καὶ ἑνὸς τῶν τμημάτων περιεχόμενον ὀρθογώνιον ἴσον ἐστὶ contained by the whole (straight-line), and one of the
τῷ τε ὑπὸ τῶν τμημάτων περιεχομένῳ ὀρθογωνίῳ καὶ τῷ pieces (of the straight-line), is equal to the rectangle conἀπὸ τοῦ προειρημένου τμήματος τετραγώνῳ. tained by (both of) the pieces, and the square on the
aforementioned piece.
Ζ Ε
Α Γ
∆
Β A C B
F D E
Εὐθεῖα γὰρ ἡ ΑΒ τετμήσθω, ὡς ἔτυχεν, κατὰ τὸ Γ· For let the straight-line AB have been cut, at random,
λέγω, ὅτι τὸ ὑπὸ τῶν ΑΒ, ΒΓ περιεχόμενον ὀρθογώνιον at (point) C. I say that the rectangle contained by AB
ἴσον ἐστὶ τῷ τε ὑπὸ τῶν ΑΓ, ΓΒ περιεχομένῳ ὀρθογωνίῳ and BC is equal to the rectangle contained by AC and
μετὰ τοῦ ἀπὸ τῆς ΒΓ τετραγώνου. CB, plus the square on BC.
᾿Αναγεγράφθω γὰρ ἀπὸ τῆς ΓΒ τετράγωνον τὸ ΓΔΕΒ, For let the square CDEB have been described on CB
καὶ διήχθω ἡ ΕΔ ἐπὶ τὸ Ζ, καὶ διὰ τοῦ Α ὁποτέρᾳ τῶν ΓΔ, [Prop. 1.46], and let ED have been drawn through to
ΒΕ παράλληλος ἤχθω ἡ ΑΖ. ἴσον δή ἐστι τὸ ΑΕ τοῖς ΑΔ, F, and let AF have been drawn through A, parallel to
ΓΕ· καί ἐστι τὸ μὲν ΑΕ τὸ ὑπὸ τῶν ΑΒ, ΒΓ περιεχόμενον either of CD or BE [Prop. 1.31]. So the (rectangle) AE
ὀρθογώνιον· περιέχεται μὲν γὰρ ὑπὸ τῶν ΑΒ, ΒΕ, ἴση δὲ ἡ is equal to the (rectangle) AD and the (square) CE. And
ΒΕ τῇ ΒΓ· τὸ δὲ ΑΔ τὸ ὑπὸ τῶν ΑΓ, ΓΒ· ἴση γὰρ ἡ ΔΓ AE is the rectangle contained by AB and BC. For it is
τῇ ΓΒ· τὸ δὲ ΔΒ τὸ ἀπὸ τῆς ΓΒ τετράγωνον· τὸ ἄρα ὑπὸ contained by AB and BE, and BE (is) equal to BC. And
τῶν ΑΒ, ΒΓ περιεχόμενον ὀρθογώνιον ἴσον ἐστὶ τῷ ὑπὸ AD (is) the (rectangle contained) by AC and CB. For
τῶν ΑΓ, ΓΒ περιεχομένῳ ὀρθογωνίῳ μετὰ τοῦ ἀπὸ τῆς ΒΓ DC (is) equal to CB. And DB (is) the square on CB.
τετραγώνου. Thus, the rectangle contained by AB and BC is equal to
᾿Εὰν ἄρα εὐθεῖα γραμμὴ τμηθῇ, ὡς ἔτυχεν, τὸ ὑπὸ τῆς the rectangle contained by AC and CB, plus the square
ὅλης καὶ ἑνὸς τῶν τμημάτων περιεχόμενον ὀρθογώνιον ἴσον on BC.
ἐστὶ τῷ τε ὑπὸ τῶν τμημάτων περιεχομένῳ ὀρθογωνίῳ καὶ Thus, if a straight-line is cut at random then the rectτῷ ἀπὸ τοῦ προειρημένου τμήματος τετραγώνῳ· ὅπερ ἔδει angle contained by the whole (straight-line), and one of
δεῖξαι. the pieces (of the straight-line), is equal to the rectangle
contained by (both of) the pieces, and the square on the
aforementioned piece. (Which is) the very thing it was
required to show.
† This proposition is a geometric version of the algebraic identity: (a + b) a = a b + a
2
.
dþ. Proposition 4†
᾿Εὰν εὐθεῖα γραμμὴ τμηθῇ, ὡς ἔτυχεν, τὸ ἀπὸ τῆς If a straight-line is cut at random then the square
ὅλης τετράγωνον ἴσον ἐστὶ τοῖς τε ἀπὸ τῶν τμημάτων τε- on the whole (straight-line) is equal to the (sum of the)
τραγώνοις καὶ τῷ δὶς ὑπὸ τῶν τμημάτων περιεχομένῳ ὀρθο- squares on the pieces (of the straight-line), and twice the
52
STOIQEIWN bþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 2
γωνίῳ. rectangle contained by the pieces.
Θ
Α
∆
Κ Η
Γ
Ζ
Β
Ε
H
A C B
G
K
D F E
Εὐθεῖα γὰρ γραμμὴ ἡ ΑΒ τετμήσθω, ὡς ἔτυχεν, κατὰ For let the straight-line AB have been cut, at random,
τὸ Γ. λέγω, ὅτι τὸ ἀπὸ τῆς ΑΒ τετράγωνον ἴσον ἐστὶ τοῖς at (point) C. I say that the square on AB is equal to
τε ἀπὸ τῶν ΑΓ, ΓΒ τετραγώνοις καὶ τῷ δὶς ὑπὸ τῶν ΑΓ, the (sum of the) squares on AC and CB, and twice the
ΓΒ περιεχομένῳ ὀρθογωνίῳ. rectangle contained by AC and CB.
᾿Αναγεγράφθω γὰρ ἀπὸ τῆς ΑΒ τετράγωνον τὸ ΑΔΕΒ, For let the square ADEB have been described on AB
καὶ ἐπεζεύχθω ἡ ΒΔ, καὶ διὰ μὲν τοῦ Γ ὁποτέρᾳ τῶν ΑΔ, [Prop. 1.46], and let BD have been joined, and let CF
ΕΒ παράλληλος ἤχθω ἡ ΓΖ, διὰ δὲ τοῦ Η ὁποτέρᾳ τῶν ΑΒ, have been drawn through C, parallel to either of AD or
ΔΕ παράλληλος ἤχθω ἡ ΘΚ. καὶ ἐπεὶ παράλληλός ἐστιν ἡ EB [Prop. 1.31], and let HK have been drawn through
ΓΖ τῇ ΑΔ, καὶ εἰς αὐτὰς ἐμπέπτωκεν ἡ ΒΔ, ἡ ἐκτὸς γωνία G, parallel to either of AB or DE [Prop. 1.31]. And since
ἡ ὑπὸ ΓΗΒ ἴση ἐστὶ τῇ ἐντὸς καὶ ἀπεναντίον τῇ ὑπὸ ΑΔΒ. CF is parallel to AD, and BD has fallen across them, the
ἀλλ᾿ ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΔΒ τῇ ὑπὸ ΑΒΔ ἐστιν ἴση, ἐπεὶ καὶ πλευρὰ ἡ external angle CGB is equal to the internal and opposite
ΒΑ τῇ ΑΔ ἐστιν ἴση· καὶ ἡ ὑπὸ ΓΗΒ ἄρα γωνιά τῇ ὑπὸ ΗΒΓ (angle) ADB [Prop. 1.29]. But, ADB is equal to ABD,
ἐστιν ἴση· ὥστε καὶ πλευρὰ ἡ ΒΓ πλευρᾷ τῇ ΓΗ ἐστιν ἴση· since the side BA is also equal to AD [Prop. 1.5]. Thus,
ἀλλ᾿ ἡ μὲν ΓΒ τῇ ΗΚ ἐστιν ἴση. ἡ δὲ ΓΗ τῇ ΚΒ· καὶ ἡ ΗΚ angle CGB is also equal to GBC. So the side BC is
ἄρα τῇ ΚΒ ἐστιν ἴση· ἰσόπλευρον ἄρα ἐστὶ τὸ ΓΗΚΒ. λέγω equal to the side CG [Prop. 1.6]. But, CB is equal to
δή, ὅτι καὶ ὀρθογώνιον. ἐπεὶ γὰρ παράλληλός ἐστιν ἡ ΓΗ GK, and CG to KB [Prop. 1.34]. Thus, GK is also equal
τῇ ΒΚ [καὶ εἰς αὐτὰς ἐμπέπτωκεν εὐθεῖα ἡ ΓΒ], αἱ ἄρα ὑπὸ to KB. Thus, CGKB is equilateral. So I say that (it is)
ΚΒΓ, ΗΓΒ γωνίαι δύο ὀρθαῖς εἰσιν ἴσαι. ὀρθὴ δὲ ἡ ὑπὸ also right-angled. For since CG is parallel to BK [and the
ΚΒΓ· ὀρθὴ ἄρα καὶ ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΓΗ· ὥστε καὶ αἱ ἀπεναντίον straight-line CB has fallen across them], the angles KBC
αἱ ὑπὸ ΓΗΚ, ΗΚΒ ὀρθαί εἰσιν. ὀρθογώνιον ἄρα ἐστὶ τὸ and GCB are thus equal to two right-angles [Prop. 1.29].
ΓΗΚΒ· ἐδείχθη δὲ καὶ ἰσόπλευρον· τετράγωνον ἄρα ἐστίν· But KBC (is) a right-angle. Thus, BCG (is) also a rightκαί ἐστιν ἀπὸ τῆς ΓΒ. διὰ τὰ αὐτὰ δὴ καὶ τὸ ΘΖ τετράγωνόν angle. So the opposite (angles) CGK and GKB are also
ἐστιν· καί ἐστιν ἀπὸ τῆς ΘΗ, τουτέστιν [ἀπὸ] τῆς ΑΓ· τὰ right-angles [Prop. 1.34]. Thus, CGKB is right-angled.
ἄρα ΘΖ, ΚΓ τετράγωνα ἀπὸ τῶν ΑΓ, ΓΒ εἰσιν. καὶ ἐπεὶ And it was also shown (to be) equilateral. Thus, it is a
ἴσον ἐστὶ τὸ ΑΗ τῷ ΗΕ, καί ἐστι τὸ ΑΗ τὸ ὑπὸ τῶν ΑΓ, square. And it is on CB. So, for the same (reasons),
ΓΒ· ἴση γὰρ ἡ ΗΓ τῇ ΓΒ· καὶ τὸ ΗΕ ἄρα ἴσον ἐστὶ τῷ HF is also a square. And it is on HG, that is to say [on]
ὑπὸ ΑΓ, ΓΒ· τὰ ἄρα ΑΗ, ΗΕ ἴσα ἐστὶ τῷ δὶς ὑπὸ τῶν AC [Prop. 1.34]. Thus, the squares HF and KC are
ΑΓ, ΓΒ. ἔστι δὲ καὶ τὰ ΘΖ, ΓΚ τετράγωνα ἀπὸ τῶν ΑΓ, on AC and CB (respectively). And the (rectangle) AG
ΓΒ· τὰ ἄρα τέσσαρα τὰ ΘΖ, ΓΚ, ΑΗ, ΗΕ ἴσα ἐστὶ τοῖς τε is equal to the (rectangle) GE [Prop. 1.43]. And AG is
ἀπὸ τῶν ΑΓ, ΓΒ τετραγώνοις καὶ τῷ δὶς ὑπὸ τῶν ΑΓ, ΓΒ the (rectangle contained) by AC and CB. For GC (is)
περιεχομένῳ ὀρθογωνίῳ. ἀλλὰ τὰ ΘΖ, ΓΚ, ΑΗ, ΗΕ ὅλον equal to CB. Thus, GE is also equal to the (rectangle
ἐστὶ τὸ ΑΔΕΒ, ὅ ἐστιν ἀπὸ τῆς ΑΒ τετράγωνον· τὸ ἄρα contained) by AC and CB. Thus, the (rectangles) AG
ἀπὸ τῆς ΑΒ τετράγωνον ἴσον ἐστὶ τοῖς τε ἀπὸ τῶν ΑΓ, and GE are equal to twice the (rectangle contained) by
ΓΒ τετραγώνοις καὶ τῷ δὶς ὑπὸ τῶν ΑΓ, ΓΒ περιεχομένῳ AC and CB. And HF and CK are the squares on AC
ὀρθογωνίῳ. and CB (respectively). Thus, the four (figures) HF, CK,
᾿Εὰν ἄρα εὐθεῖα γραμμὴ τμηθῇ, ὡς ἔτυχεν, τὸ ἀπὸ τῆς AG, and GE are equal to the (sum of the) squares on
53
STOIQEIWN bþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 2
ὅλης τετράγωνον ἴσον ἐστὶ τοῖς τε ἀπὸ τῶν τμημάτων τε- AC and BC, and twice the rectangle contained by AC
τραγώνοις καὶ τῷ δὶς ὑπὸ τῶν τμημάτων περιεχομένῳ ὀρθο- and CB. But, the (figures) HF, CK, AG, and GE are
γωνίῳ· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. (equivalent to) the whole of ADEB, which is the square
on AB. Thus, the square on AB is equal to the (sum
of the) squares on AC and CB, and twice the rectangle
contained by AC and CB.
Thus, if a straight-line is cut at random then the
square on the whole (straight-line) is equal to the (sum
of the) squares on the pieces (of the straight-line), and
twice the rectangle contained by the pieces. (Which is)
the very thing it was required to show.
† This proposition is a geometric version of the algebraic identity: (a + b)
2 = a
2 + b
2 + 2 a b.
eþ. Proposition 5‡
᾿Εὰν εὐθεῖα γραμμὴ τμηθῇ εἰς ἴσα καὶ ἄνισα, τὸ ὑπὸ τῶν If a straight-line is cut into equal and unequal (pieces)
ἀνίσων τῆς ὅλης τμημάτων περιεχόμενον ὀρθογώνιον μετὰ then the rectangle contained by the unequal pieces of the
τοῦ ἀπὸ τῆς μεταξὺ τῶν τομῶν τετραγώνου ἴσον ἐστὶ τῷ whole (straight-line), plus the square on the (difference)
ἀπὸ τῆς ἡμισείας τετραγώνῳ. between the (equal and unequal) pieces, is equal to the
square on half (of the straight-line).
Ν
Κ
Α Γ
Μ
Ε
Λ
∆
Η Ζ
Β
Ξ
Μ
Θ
F
M
A B C D
E G
K
N
P
L
H
O
Εὐθεῖα γάρ τις ἡ ΑΒ τετμήσθω εἰς μὲν ἴσα κατὰ τὸ For let any straight-line AB have been cut—equally at
Γ, εἰς δὲ ἄνισα κατὰ τὸ Δ· λέγω, ὅτι τὸ ὑπὸ τῶν ΑΔ, ΔΒ C, and unequally at D. I say that the rectangle contained
περιεχόμενον ὀρθογώνιον μετὰ τοῦ ἀπὸ τῆς ΓΔ τετραγώνου by AD and DB, plus the square on CD, is equal to the
ἴσον ἐστὶ τῷ ἀπὸ τῆς ΓΒ τετραγώνῳ. square on CB.
᾿Αναγεγράφθω γὰρ ἀπὸ τῆς ΓΒ τετράγωνον τὸ ΓΕΖΒ, For let the square CEFB have been described on CB
καὶ ἐπεζεύχθω ἡ ΒΕ, καὶ διὰ μὲν τοῦ Δ ὁποτέρᾳ τῶν ΓΕ, [Prop. 1.46], and let BE have been joined, and let DG
ΒΖ παράλληλος ἤχθω ἡ ΔΗ, διὰ δὲ τοῦ Θ ὁποτέρᾳ τῶν have been drawn through D, parallel to either of CE or
ΑΒ, ΕΖ παράλληλος πάλιν ἤχθω ἡ ΚΜ, καὶ πάλιν διὰ τοῦ Α BF [Prop. 1.31], and again let KM have been drawn
ὁποτέρᾳ τῶν ΓΛ, ΒΜ παράλληλος ἤχθω ἡ ΑΚ. καὶ ἐπεὶ ἴσον through H, parallel to either of AB or EF [Prop. 1.31],
ἐστὶ τὸ ΓΘ παραπλήρωμα τῷ ΘΖ παραπληρώματι, κοινὸν and again let AK have been drawn through A, parallel to
προσκείσθω τὸ ΔΜ· ὅλον ἄρα τὸ ΓΜ ὅλῳ τῷ ΔΖ ἴσον either of CL or BM [Prop. 1.31]. And since the compleἐστίν. ἀλλὰ τὸ ΓΜ τῷ ΑΛ ἴσον ἐστίν, ἐπεὶ καὶ ἡ ΑΓ τῇ ment CH is equal to the complement HF [Prop. 1.43],
ΓΒ ἐστιν ἴση· καὶ τὸ ΑΛ ἄρα τῷ ΔΖ ἴσον ἐστίν. κοινὸν let the (square) DM have been added to both. Thus,
προσκείσθω τὸ ΓΘ· ὅλον ἄρα τὸ ΑΘ τῷ ΜΝΞ† γνώμονι the whole (rectangle) CM is equal to the whole (rectἴσον ἐστίν. ἀλλὰ τὸ ΑΘ τὸ ὑπὸ τῶν ΑΔ, ΔΒ ἐστιν· ἴση angle) DF. But, (rectangle) CM is equal to (rectangle)
γὰρ ἡ ΔΘ τῇ ΔΒ· καὶ ὁ ΜΝΞ ἄρα γνώμων ἴσος ἐστὶ τῷ AL, since AC is also equal to CB [Prop. 1.36]. Thus,
ὑπὸ ΑΔ, ΔΒ. κοινὸν προσκείσθω τὸ ΛΗ, ὅ ἐστιν ἴσον τῷ (rectangle) AL is also equal to (rectangle) DF. Let (rectἀπὸ τῆς ΓΔ· ὁ ἄρα ΜΝΞ γνώμων καὶ τὸ ΛΗ ἴσα ἐστὶ τῷ angle) CH have been added to both. Thus, the whole
ὑπὸ τῶν ΑΔ, ΔΒ περιεχομένῳ ὀρθογωνίῳ καὶ τῷ ἀπὸ τῆς (rectangle) AH is equal to the gnomon NOP. But, AH
54
STOIQEIWN bþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 2
ΓΔ τετραγώνῳ. ἀλλὰ ὁ ΜΝΞ γνώμων καὶ τὸ ΛΗ ὅλον ἐστὶ is the (rectangle contained) by AD and DB. For DH
τὸ ΓΕΖΒ τετράγωνον, ὅ ἐστιν ἀπὸ τῆς ΓΒ· τὸ ἄρα ὑπὸ τῶν (is) equal to DB. Thus, the gnomon NOP is also equal
ΑΔ, ΔΒ περιεχόμενον ὀρθογώνιον μετὰ τοῦ ἀπὸ τῆς ΓΔ to the (rectangle contained) by AD and DB. Let LG,
τετραγώνου ἴσον ἐστὶ τῷ ἀπὸ τῆς ΓΒ τετραγώνῳ. which is equal to the (square) on CD, have been added to
᾿Εὰν ἄρα εὐθεῖα γραμμὴ τμηθῇ εἰς ἴσα καὶ ἄνισα, τὸ ὑπὸ both. Thus, the gnomon NOP and the (square) LG are
τῶν ἀνίσων τῆς ὅλης τμημάτων περιεχόμενον ὀρθογώνιον equal to the rectangle contained by AD and DB, and the
μετὰ τοῦ ἀπὸ τῆς μεταξὺ τῶν τομῶν τετραγώνου ἴσον ἐστὶ square on CD. But, the gnomon NOP and the (square)
τῷ ἀπὸ τῆς ἡμισείας τετραγώνῳ. ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. LG is (equivalent to) the whole square CEFB, which is
on CB. Thus, the rectangle contained by AD and DB,
plus the square on CD, is equal to the square on CB.
Thus, if a straight-line is cut into equal and unequal
(pieces) then the rectangle contained by the unequal
pieces of the whole (straight-line), plus the square on the
(difference) between the (equal and unequal) pieces, is
equal to the square on half (of the straight-line). (Which
is) the very thing it was required to show.
† Note the (presumably mistaken) double use of the label M in the Greek text.
‡ This proposition is a geometric version of the algebraic identity: a b + [(a + b)/2 − b]
2 = [(a + b)/2]2
.
þ. Proposition 6†
᾿Εὰν εὐθεῖα γραμμὴ τμηθῇ δίχα, προστεθῇ δέ τις αὐτῇ If a straight-line is cut in half, and any straight-line
εὐθεῖα ἐπ᾿ εὐθείας, τὸ ὑπὸ τῆς ὅλης σὺν τῇ προσκειμένῃ καὶ added to it straight-on, then the rectangle contained by
τῆς προσκειμένης περιεχόμενον ὀρθόγώνιον μετὰ τοῦ ἀπὸ the whole (straight-line) with the (straight-line) having
τῆς ἡμισείας τετραγώνου ἴσον ἐστὶ τῷ ἀπὸ τῆς συγκειμένης being added, and the (straight-line) having being added,
ἔκ τε τῆς ἡμισείας καὶ τῆς προσκειμένης τετραγώνῳ. plus the square on half (of the original straight-line), is
equal to the square on the sum of half (of the original
straight-line) and the (straight-line) having been added.
Θ
Γ Β
Η
Μ
Α
Κ
Ε
∆
Ζ
Λ
Ο
Ν
Ξ O
C B D
E G F
N M
P
H
A
K L
Εὐθεῖα γάρ τις ἡ ΑΒ τετμήσθω δίχα κατὰ τὸ Γ σημεῖον, For let any straight-line AB have been cut in half at
προσκείσθω δέ τις αὐτῇ εὐθεῖα ἐπ᾿ εὐθείας ἡ ΒΔ· λέγω, point C, and let any straight-line BD have been added to
ὅτι τὸ ὑπὸ τῶν ΑΔ, ΔΒ περιεχόμενον ὀρθογώνιον μετὰ it straight-on. I say that the rectangle contained by AD
τοῦ ἀπὸ τῆς ΓΒ τετραγώνου ἴσον ἐστὶ τῷ ἀπὸ τῆς ΓΔ τε- and DB, plus the square on CB, is equal to the square
τραγώνῳ. on CD.
᾿Αναγεγράφθω γὰρ ἀπὸ τῆς ΓΔ τετράγωνον τὸ ΓΕΖΔ, For let the square CEFD have been described on
καὶ ἐπεζεύχθω ἡ ΔΕ, καὶ διὰ μὲν τοῦ Β σημείου ὁποτέρᾳ CD [Prop. 1.46], and let DE have been joined, and
τῶν ΕΓ, ΔΖ παράλληλος ἤχθω ἡ ΒΗ, διὰ δὲ τοῦ Θ σημείου let BG have been drawn through point B, parallel to
ὁποτέρᾳ τῶν ΑΒ, ΕΖ παράλληλος ἤχθω ἡ ΚΜ, καὶ ἔτι διὰ either of EC or DF [Prop. 1.31], and let KM have
τοῦ Α ὁποτέρᾳ τῶν ΓΛ, ΔΜ παράλληλος ἤχθω ἡ ΑΚ. been drawn through point H, parallel to either of AB
᾿Επεὶ οὖν ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ΑΓ τῇ ΓΒ, ἴσον ἐστὶ καὶ τὸ ΑΛ or EF [Prop. 1.31], and finally let AK have been drawn
55
STOIQEIWN bþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 2
τῷ ΓΘ. ἀλλὰ τὸ ΓΘ τῷ ΘΖ ἴσον ἐστίν. καὶ τὸ ΑΛ ἄρα τῷ through A, parallel to either of CL or DM [Prop. 1.31].
ΘΖ ἐστιν ἴσον. κοινὸν προσκείσθω τὸ ΓΜ· ὅλον ἄρα τὸ Therefore, since AC is equal to CB, (rectangle) AL is
ΑΜ τῷ ΝΞΟ γνώμονί ἐστιν ἴσον. ἀλλὰ τὸ ΑΜ ἐστι τὸ ὑπὸ also equal to (rectangle) CH [Prop. 1.36]. But, (rectanτῶν ΑΔ, ΔΒ· ἴση γάρ ἐστιν ἡ ΔΜ τῇ ΔΒ· καὶ ὁ ΝΞΟ ἄρα gle) CH is equal to (rectangle) HF [Prop. 1.43]. Thus,
γνώμων ἴσος ἐστὶ τῷ ὑπὸ τῶν ΑΔ, ΔΒ [περιεχομένῳ ὀρθο- (rectangle) AL is also equal to (rectangle) HF. Let (rectγωνίῳ]. κοινὸν προσκείσθω τὸ ΛΗ, ὅ ἐστιν ἴσον τῷ ἀπὸ angle) CM have been added to both. Thus, the whole
τῆς ΒΓ τετραγώνῳ· τὸ ἄρα ὑπὸ τῶν ΑΔ, ΔΒ περιεχόμενον (rectangle) AM is equal to the gnomon NOP. But, AM
ὀρθογώνιον μετὰ τοῦ ἀπὸ τῆς ΓΒ τετραγώνου ἴσον ἐστὶ is the (rectangle contained) by AD and DB. For DM is
τῷ ΝΞΟ γνώμονι καὶ τῷ ΛΗ. ἀλλὰ ὁ ΝΞΟ γνώμων καὶ equal to DB. Thus, gnomon NOP is also equal to the
τὸ ΛΗ ὅλον ἐστὶ τὸ ΓΕΖΔ τετράγωνον, ὅ ἐστιν ἀπὸ τῆς [rectangle contained] by AD and DB. Let LG, which
ΓΔ· τὸ ἄρα ὑπὸ τῶν ΑΔ, ΔΒ περιεχόμενον ὀρθογώνιον is equal to the square on BC, have been added to both.
μετὰ τοῦ ἀπὸ τῆς ΓΒ τετραγώνου ἴσον ἐστὶ τῷ ἀπὸ τῆς ΓΔ Thus, the rectangle contained by AD and DB, plus the
τετραγώνῳ. square on CB, is equal to the gnomon NOP and the
᾿Εὰν ἄρα εὐθεῖα γραμμὴ τμηθῇ δίχα, προστεθῇ δέ τις (square) LG. But the gnomon NOP and the (square)
αὐτῇ εὐθεῖα ἐπ᾿ εὐθείας, τὸ ὑπὸ τῆς ὅλης σὺν τῇ προ- LG is (equivalent to) the whole square CEFD, which is
σκειμένῃ καὶ τῆς προσκειμένης περιεχόμενον ὀρθόγώνιον on CD. Thus, the rectangle contained by AD and DB,
μετὰ τοῦ ἀπὸ τῆς ἡμισείας τετραγώνου ἴσον ἐστὶ τῷ ἀπὸ plus the square on CB, is equal to the square on CD.
τῆς συγκειμένης ἔκ τε τῆς ἡμισείας καὶ τῆς προσκειμένης Thus, if a straight-line is cut in half, and any straightτετραγώνῳ· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. line added to it straight-on, then the rectangle contained
by the whole (straight-line) with the (straight-line) having being added, and the (straight-line) having being
added, plus the square on half (of the original straightline), is equal to the square on the sum of half (of the
original straight-line) and the (straight-line) having been
added. (Which is) the very thing it was required to show.
† This proposition is a geometric version of the algebraic identity: (2 a + b) b + a
2 = (a + b)
2
.
zþ. Proposition 7†
᾿Εὰν εὐθεῖα γραμμὴ τμηθῇ, ὡς ἔτυχεν, τὸ ἀπὸ τῆς ὅλης If a straight-line is cut at random then the sum of
καὶ τὸ ἀφ᾿ ἑνὸς τῶν τμημάτων τὰ συναμφότερα τετράγωνα the squares on the whole (straight-line), and one of the
ἴσα ἐστὶ τῷ τε δὶς ὑπὸ τῆς ὅλης καὶ τοῦ εἰρημένου τμήματος pieces (of the straight-line), is equal to twice the rectanπεριεχομένῳ ὀρθογωνίῳ καὶ τῷ ἀπὸ τοῦ λοιποῦ τμήματος gle contained by the whole, and the said piece, and the
τετραγώνῳ. square on the remaining piece.
Θ
Ν
Α Γ
Η Ζ
Λ
∆
Μ
Κ
Β
Ε
M
A C B
H
D N E
F K G
L
Εὐθεῖα γάρ τις ἡ ΑΒ τετμήσθω, ὡς ἔτυχεν, κατὰ τὸ Γ For let any straight-line AB have been cut, at random,
σημεῖον· λέγω, ὅτι τὰ ἀπὸ τῶν ΑΒ, ΒΓ τετράγωνα ἴσα ἐστὶ at point C. I say that the (sum of the) squares on AB and
τῷ τε δὶς ὑπὸ τῶν ΑΒ, ΒΓ περιεχομένῳ ὀρθογωνίῳ καὶ τῷ BC is equal to twice the rectangle contained by AB and
56
STOIQEIWN bþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 2
ἀπὸ τῆς ΓΑ τετραγώνῳ. BC, and the square on CA.
᾿Αναγεγράφθω γὰρ ἀπὸ τῆς ΑΒ τετράγωνον τὸ ΑΔΕΒ· For let the square ADEB have been described on AB
καὶ καταγεγράφθω τὸ σχῆμα. [Prop. 1.46], and let the (rest of) the figure have been
᾿Επεὶ οὖν ἴσον ἐστὶ τὸ ΑΗ τῷ ΗΕ, κοινὸν προσκείσθω drawn.
τὸ ΓΖ· ὅλον ἄρα τὸ ΑΖ ὅλῳ τῷ ΓΕ ἴσον ἐστίν· τὰ ἄρα Therefore, since (rectangle) AG is equal to (rectanΑΖ, ΓΕ διπλάσιά ἐστι τοῦ ΑΖ. ἀλλὰ τὰ ΑΖ, ΓΕ ὁ ΚΛΜ gle) GE [Prop. 1.43], let the (square) CF have been
ἐστι γνώμων καὶ τὸ ΓΖ τετράγωνον· ὁ ΚΛΜ ἄρα γνώμων added to both. Thus, the whole (rectangle) AF is equal
καὶ τὸ ΓΖ διπλάσιά ἐστι τοῦ ΑΖ. ἔστι δὲ τοῦ ΑΖ διπλάσιον to the whole (rectangle) CE. Thus, (rectangle) AF plus
καὶ τὸ δὶς ὑπὸ τῶν ΑΒ, ΒΓ· ἴση γὰρ ἡ ΒΖ τῇ ΒΓ· ὁ ἄρα (rectangle) CE is double (rectangle) AF. But, (rectanΚΛΜ γνώμων καὶ τὸ ΓΖ τετράγωνον ἴσον ἐστὶ τῷ δὶς ὑπὸ gle) AF plus (rectangle) CE is the gnomon KLM, and
τῶν ΑΒ, ΒΓ. κοινὸν προσκείσθω τὸ ΔΗ, ὅ ἐστιν ἀπὸ τῆς the square CF. Thus, the gnomon KLM, and the square
ΑΓ τετράγωνον· ὁ ἄρα ΚΛΜ γνώμων καὶ τὰ ΒΗ, ΗΔ CF, is double the (rectangle) AF. But double the (rectτετράγωνα ἴσα ἐστὶ τῷ τε δὶς ὑπὸ τῶν ΑΒ, ΒΓ περιεχομένῳ angle) AF is also twice the (rectangle contained) by AB
ὀρθογωνίῳ καὶ τῷ ἀπὸ τῆς ΑΓ τετραγώνῳ. ἀλλὰ ὁ ΚΛΜ and BC. For BF (is) equal to BC. Thus, the gnomon
γνώμων καὶ τὰ ΒΗ, ΗΔ τετράγωνα ὅλον ἐστὶ τὸ ΑΔΕΒ καὶ KLM, and the square CF, are equal to twice the (rectτὸ ΓΖ, ἅ ἐστιν ἀπὸ τῶν ΑΒ, ΒΓ τετράγωνα· τὰ ἄρα ἀπὸ τῶν angle contained) by AB and BC. Let DG, which is
ΑΒ, ΒΓ τετράγωνα ἴσα ἐστὶ τῷ [τε] δὶς ὑπὸ τῶν ΑΒ, ΒΓ the square on AC, have been added to both. Thus, the
περιεχομένῳ ὀρθογωνίῳ μετὰ τοῦ ἀπὸ τῆς ΑΓ τετραγώνου. gnomon KLM, and the squares BG and GD, are equal
᾿Εὰν ἄρα εὐθεῖα γραμμὴ τμηθῇ, ὡς ἔτυχεν, τὸ ἀπὸ to twice the rectangle contained by AB and BC, and the
τῆς ὅλης καὶ τὸ ἀφ᾿ ἑνὸς τῶν τμημάτων τὰ συναμφότερα square on AC. But, the gnomon KLM and the squares
τετράγωνα ἴσα ἐστὶ τῷ τε δὶς ὑπὸ τῆς ὅλης καὶ τοῦ BG and GD is (equivalent to) the whole of ADEB and
εἰρημένου τμήματος περιεχομένῳ ὀρθογωνίῳ καὶ τῷ ἀπὸ CF, which are the squares on AB and BC (respectively).
τοῦ λοιποῦ τμήματος τετραγώνῳ· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. Thus, the (sum of the) squares on AB and BC is equal
to twice the rectangle contained by AB and BC, and the
square on AC.
Thus, if a straight-line is cut at random then the sum
of the squares on the whole (straight-line), and one of
the pieces (of the straight-line), is equal to twice the rectangle contained by the whole, and the said piece, and the
square on the remaining piece. (Which is) the very thing
it was required to show.
† This proposition is a geometric version of the algebraic identity: (a + b)
2 + a
2 = 2 (a + b) a + b
2
.
hþ. Proposition 8†
᾿Εὰν εὐθεῖα γραμμὴ τμηθῇ, ὡς ἔτυχεν, τὸ τετράκις ὑπὸ If a straight-line is cut at random then four times the
τῆς ὅλης καὶ ἑνὸς τῶν τμημάτων περιεχόμενον ὀρθογώνιον rectangle contained by the whole (straight-line), and one
μετὰ τοῦ ἀπὸ τοῦ λοιποῦ τμήματος τετραγώνου ἴσον ἐστὶ of the pieces (of the straight-line), plus the square on the
τῷ ἀπό τε τῆς ὅλης καὶ τοῦ εἰρημένου τμήματος ὡς ἀπὸ remaining piece, is equal to the square described on the
μιᾶς ἀναγραφέντι τετραγώνῳ. whole and the former piece, as on one (complete straightΕὐθεῖα γάρ τις ἡ ΑΒ τετμήσθω, ὡς ἔτυχεν, κατὰ τὸ line).
Γ σημεῖον· λέγω, ὅτι τὸ τετράκις ὑπὸ τῶν ΑΒ, ΒΓ πε- For let any straight-line AB have been cut, at random,
ριεχόμενον ὀρθογώνιον μετὰ τοῦ ἀπὸ τῆς ΑΓ τετραγώνου at point C. I say that four times the rectangle contained
ἴσον ἐστὶ τῷ ἀπὸ τῆς ΑΒ, ΒΓ ὡς ἀπὸ μιᾶς ἀναγραφέντι by AB and BC, plus the square on AC, is equal to the
τετραγώνῳ. square described on AB and BC, as on one (complete
᾿Εκβεβλήσθω γὰρ ἐπ᾿ εὐθείας [τῇ ΑΒ εὐθεῖα] ἡ ΒΔ, straight-line).
καὶ κείσθω τῇ ΓΒ ἴση ἡ ΒΔ, καὶ ἀναγεγράφθω ἀπὸ τῆς For let BD have been produced in a straight-line
ΑΔ τετράγωνον τὸ ΑΕΖΔ, καὶ καταγεγράφθω διπλοῦν τὸ [with the straight-line AB], and let BD be made equal
σχῆμα. to CB [Prop. 1.3], and let the square AEFD have been
described on AD [Prop. 1.46], and let the (rest of the)
figure have been drawn double.
57
STOIQEIWN bþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 2
Υ
Α Γ Β
Ο
Η Ν Κ
Π Ρ
Τ
Ε Θ Λ
Μ
Ξ Σ
∆
Ζ
U
A C B D
N
P
Q
G
K
R
T
E H L F
S
M
O
᾿Επεὶ οὖν ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ΓΒ τῇ ΒΔ, ἀλλὰ ἡ μὲν ΓΒ τῇ ΗΚ Therefore, since CB is equal to BD, but CB is equal
ἐστιν ἴση, ἡ δὲ ΒΔ τῇ ΚΝ, καὶ ἡ ΗΚ ἄρα τῇ ΚΝ ἐστιν ἴση. to GK [Prop. 1.34], and BD to KN [Prop. 1.34], GK is
διὰ τὰ αὐτὰ δὴ καὶ ἡ ΠΡ τῇ ΡΟ ἐστιν ἴση. καὶ ἐπεὶ ἴση ἐστὶν thus also equal to KN. So, for the same (reasons), QR is
ἡ ΒΓ τῂ ΒΔ, ἡ δὲ ΗΚ τῇ ΚΝ, ἴσον ἄρα ἐστὶ καὶ τὸ μὲν equal to RP. And since BC is equal to BD, and GK to
ΓΚ τῷ ΚΔ, τὸ δὲ ΗΡ τῷ ΡΝ. ἀλλὰ τὸ ΓΚ τῷ ΡΝ ἐστιν KN, (square) CK is thus also equal to (square) KD, and
ἴσον· παραπληρώματα γὰρ τοῦ ΓΟ παραλληλογράμμου· καὶ (square) GR to (square) RN [Prop. 1.36]. But, (square)
τὸ ΚΔ ἄρα τῷ ΗΡ ἴσον ἐστίν· τὰ τέσσαρα ἄρα τὰ ΔΚ, ΓΚ, CK is equal to (square) RN. For (they are) compleΗΡ, ΡΝ ἴσα ἀλλήλοις ἐστίν. τὰ τέσσαρα ἄρα τετραπλάσιά ments in the parallelogram CP [Prop. 1.43]. Thus,
ἐστι τοῦ ΓΚ. πάλιν ἐπεὶ ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ΓΒ τῇ ΒΔ, ἀλλὰ ἡ μὲν (square) KD is also equal to (square) GR. Thus, the
ΒΔ τῇ ΒΚ, τουτέστι τῇ ΓΗ ἴση, ἡ δὲ ΓΒ τῇ ΗΚ, τουτέστι four (squares) DK, CK, GR, and RN are equal to one
τῇ ΗΠ, ἐστιν ἴση, καὶ ἡ ΓΗ ἄρα τῇ ΗΠ ἴση ἐστίν. καὶ ἐπεὶ another. Thus, the four (taken together) are quadruple
ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ μὲν ΓΗ τῇ ΗΠ, ἡ δὲ ΠΡ τῇ ΡΟ, ἴσον ἐστὶ καὶ τὸ (square) CK. Again, since CB is equal to BD, but BD
μὲν ΑΗ τῷ ΜΠ, τὸ δὲ ΠΛ τῷ ΡΖ. ἀλλὰ τὸ ΜΠ τῷ ΠΛ ἐστιν (is) equal to BK—that is to say, CG—and CB is equal
ἴσον· παραπληρώματα γὰρ τοῦ ΜΛ παραλληλογράμμου· καὶ to GK—that is to say, GQ—CG is thus also equal to GQ.
τὸ ΑΗ ἄρα τῷ ΡΖ ἴσον ἐστίν· τὰ τέσσαρα ἄρα τὰ ΑΗ, ΜΠ, And since CG is equal to GQ, and QR to RP, (rectanΠΛ, ΡΖ ἴσα ἀλλήλοις ἐστίν· τὰ τέσσαρα ἄρα τοῦ ΑΗ ἐστι gle) AG is also equal to (rectangle) MQ, and (rectangle)
τετραπλάσια. ἐδείχθη δὲ καὶ τὰ τέσσαρα τὰ ΓΚ, ΚΔ, ΗΡ, QL to (rectangle) RF [Prop. 1.36]. But, (rectangle) MQ
ΡΝ τοῦ ΓΚ τετραπλάσια· τὰ ἄρα ὀκτώ, ἃ περιέχει τὸν ΣΤΥ is equal to (rectangle) QL. For (they are) complements
γνώμονα, τετραπλάσιά ἐστι τοῦ ΑΚ. καὶ ἐπεὶ τὸ ΑΚ τὸ ὑπὸ in the parallelogram ML [Prop. 1.43]. Thus, (rectangle)
τῶν ΑΒ, ΒΔ ἐστιν· ἴση γὰρ ἡ ΒΚ τῇ ΒΔ· τὸ ἄρα τετράκις AG is also equal to (rectangle) RF. Thus, the four (rectὑπὸ τῶν ΑΒ, ΒΔ τετραπλάσιόν ἐστι τοῦ ΑΚ. ἐδείχθη δὲ angles) AG, MQ, QL, and RF are equal to one another.
τοῦ ΑΚ τετραπλάσιος καὶ ὁ ΣΤΥ γνώμων· τὸ ἄρα τετράκις Thus, the four (taken together) are quadruple (rectanὑπὸ τῶν ΑΒ, ΒΔ ἴσον ἐστὶ τῷ ΣΤΥ γνώμονι. κοινὸν προ- gle) AG. And it was also shown that the four (squares)
σκείσθω τὸ ΞΘ, ὅ ἐστιν ἴσον τῷ ἀπὸ τῆς ΑΓ τετραγώνῳ· τὸ CK, KD, GR, and RN (taken together are) quadruple
ἄρα τετράκις ὑπὸ τῶν ΑΒ, ΒΔ περιεχόμενον ὀρθογώνιον (square) CK. Thus, the eight (figures taken together),
μετὰ τοῦ ἀπὸ ΑΓ τετραγώνου ἴσον ἐστὶ τῷ ΣΤΥ γνώμονι which comprise the gnomon STU, are quadruple (rectκαὶ τῷ ΞΘ. ἀλλὰ ὁ ΣΤΥ γνώμων καὶ τὸ ΞΘ ὅλον ἐστὶ τὸ angle) AK. And since AK is the (rectangle contained)
ΑΕΖΔ τετράγωνον, ὅ ἐστιν ἀπὸ τῆς ΑΔ· τὸ ἄρα τετράκις by AB and BD, for BK (is) equal to BD, four times the
ὑπὸ τῶν ΑΒ, ΒΔ μετὰ τοῦ ἀπὸ ΑΓ ἴσον ἐστὶ τῷ ἀπὸ ΑΔ (rectangle contained) by AB and BD is quadruple (rectτετραγώνῳ· ἴση δὲ ἡ ΒΔ τῇ ΒΓ. τὸ ἄρα τετράκις ὑπὸ τῶν angle) AK. But the gnomon STU was also shown (to
ΑΒ, ΒΓ περιεχόμενον ὀρθογώνιον μετὰ τοῦ ἀπὸ ΑΓ τε- be equal to) quadruple (rectangle) AK. Thus, four times
τραγώνου ἴσον ἐστὶ τῷ ἀπὸ τῆς ΑΔ, τουτέστι τῷ ἀπὸ τῆς the (rectangle contained) by AB and BD is equal to the
ΑΒ καὶ ΒΓ ὡς ἀπὸ μιᾶς ἀναγραφέντι τετραγώνῳ. gnomon STU. Let OH, which is equal to the square on
᾿Εὰν ἄρα εὐθεῖα γραμμὴ τμηθῇ, ὡς ἔτυχεν, τὸ τετράκις AC, have been added to both. Thus, four times the rectὑπὸ τῆς ὅλης καὶ ἑνὸς τῶν τμημάτων περιεχόμενον ὀρθογώ- angle contained by AB and BD, plus the square on AC,
νιον μετὰ τοῦ ἀπὸ τοῦ λοιποῦ τμήματος τετραγώνου ἴσου is equal to the gnomon STU, and the (square) OH. But,
58
STOIQEIWN bþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 2
ἐστὶ τῷ ἀπό τε τῆς ὅλης καὶ τοῦ εἰρημένου τμήματος ὡς the gnomon STU and the (square) OH is (equivalent to)
ἀπὸ μιᾶς ἀναγραφέντι τετραγώνῳ· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. the whole square AEFD, which is on AD. Thus, four
times the (rectangle contained) by AB and BD, plus the
(square) on AC, is equal to the square on AD. And BD
(is) equal to BC. Thus, four times the rectangle contained by AB and BC, plus the square on AC, is equal to
the (square) on AD, that is to say the square described
on AB and BC, as on one (complete straight-line).
Thus, if a straight-line is cut at random then four times
the rectangle contained by the whole (straight-line), and
one of the pieces (of the straight-line), plus the square
on the remaining piece, is equal to the square described
on the whole and the former piece, as on one (complete
straight-line). (Which is) the very thing it was required
to show.
† This proposition is a geometric version of the algebraic identity: 4 (a + b) a + b
2 = [(a + b) + a]
2
.
jþ. Proposition 9†
᾿Εὰν εὐθεῖα γραμμὴ τμηθῇ εἰς ἴσα καὶ ἄνισα, τὰ ἀπὸ If a straight-line is cut into equal and unequal (pieces)
τῶν ἀνίσων τῆς ὅλης τμημάτων τετράγωνα διπλάσιά ἐστι then the (sum of the) squares on the unequal pieces of the
τοῦ τε ἀπὸ τῆς ἡμισείας καὶ τοῦ ἀπὸ τῆς μεταξὺ τῶν τομῶν whole (straight-line) is double the (sum of the) square
τετραγώνου. on half (the straight-line) and (the square) on the (difference) between the (equal and unequal) pieces.
Ζ
Α Γ ∆
Ε
Β
Η F
A C B D
E
G
Εὐθεῖα γάρ τις ἡ ΑΒ τετμήσθω εἰς μὲν ἴσα κατὰ τὸ For let any straight-line AB have been cut—equally at
Γ, εἱς δὲ ἄνισα κατὰ τὸ Δ· λέγω, ὅτι τὰ ἀπὸ τῶν ΑΔ, ΔΒ C, and unequally at D. I say that the (sum of the) squares
τετράγωνα διπλάσιά ἐστι τῶν ἀπὸ τῶν ΑΓ, ΓΔ τετραγώνων. on AD and DB is double the (sum of the squares) on AC
῎Ηχθω γὰρ ἀπὸ τοῦ Γ τῇ ΑΒ πρὸς ὀρθὰς ἡ ΓΕ, καὶ and CD.
κείσθω ἴση ἑκατέρᾳ τῶν ΑΓ, ΓΒ, καὶ ἐπεζεύχθωσαν αἱ ΕΑ, For let CE have been drawn from (point) C, at rightΕΒ, καὶ διὰ μὲν τοῦ Δ τῇ ΕΓ παράλληλος ἤχθω ἡ ΔΖ, διὰ angles to AB [Prop. 1.11], and let it be made equal to
δὲ τοῦ Ζ τῇ ΑΒ ἡ ΖΗ, καὶ ἐπεζεύχθω ἡ ΑΖ. καὶ ἐπεὶ ἴση each of AC and CB [Prop. 1.3], and let EA and EB
ἐστὶν ἡ ΑΓ τῇ ΓΕ, ἴση ἐστὶ καὶ ἡ ὑπὸ ΕΑΓ γωνία τῇ ὑπὸ have been joined. And let DF have been drawn through
ΑΕΓ. καὶ ἐπεὶ ὀρθή ἐστιν ἡ πρὸς τῷ Γ, λοιπαὶ ἄρα αἱ ὑπὸ (point) D, parallel to EC [Prop. 1.31], and (let) FG
ΕΑΓ, ΑΕΓ μιᾷ ὀρθῇ ἴσαι εἰσίν· καί εἰσιν ἴσαι· ἡμίσεια ἄρα (have been drawn) through (point) F, (parallel) to AB
ὀρθῆς ἐστιν ἑκατέρα τῶν ὑπὸ ΓΕΑ, ΓΑΕ. δὶα τὰ αὐτὰ δὴ [Prop. 1.31]. And let AF have been joined. And since
καὶ ἑκατέρα τῶν ὑπὸ ΓΕΒ, ΕΒΓ ἡμίσειά ἐστιν ὀρθῆς· ὅλη AC is equal to CE, the angle EAC is also equal to the
ἄρα ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΕΒ ὀρθή ἐστιν. καὶ ἐπεὶ ἡ ὑπὸ ΗΕΖ ἡμίσειά (angle) AEC [Prop. 1.5]. And since the (angle) at C is
ἐστιν ὀρθῆς, ὀρθὴ δὲ ἡ ὑπὸ ΕΗΖ· ἴση γάρ ἐστι τῇ ἐντὸς καὶ a right-angle, the (sum of the) remaining angles (of triἀπεναντίον τῇ ὑπὸ ΕΓΒ· λοιπὴ ἄρα ἡ ὑπὸ ΕΖΗ ἡμίσειά ἐστιν angle AEC), EAC and AEC, is thus equal to one right59
STOIQEIWN bþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 2
ὀρθῆς· ἴση ἄρα [ἐστὶν] ἡ ὑπὸ ΗΕΖ γωνία τῇ ὑπὸ ΕΖΗ· ὥστε angle [Prop. 1.32]. And they are equal. Thus, (angles)
καὶ πλευρὰ ἡ ΕΗ τῇ ΗΖ ἐστιν ἴση. πάλιν ἐπεὶ ἡ πρὸς τῷ Β CEA and CAE are each half a right-angle. So, for the
γωνία ἡμίσειά ἐστιν ὀρθῆς, ὀρθὴ δὲ ἡ ὑπὸ ΖΔΒ· ἴση γὰρ same (reasons), (angles) CEB and EBC are also each
πάλιν ἐστὶ τῇ ἐντὸς καὶ ἀπεναντίον τῇ ὑπὸ ΕΓΒ· λοιπὴ ἄρα half a right-angle. Thus, the whole (angle) AEB is a
ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΖΔ ἡμίσειά ἐστιν ὀρθῆς· ἴση ἄρα ἡ πρὸς τῷ Β γωνία right-angle. And since GEF is half a right-angle, and
τῇ ὑπὸ ΔΖΒ· ὥστε καὶ πλευρὰ ἡ ΖΔ πλευρᾷ τῇ ΔΒ ἐστιν EGF (is) a right-angle—for it is equal to the internal and
ἴση. καὶ ἐπεὶ ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ΑΓ τῇ ΓΕ, ἴσον ἐστὶ καὶ τὸ ἀπὸ ΑΓ opposite (angle) ECB [Prop. 1.29]—the remaining (anτῷ ἀπὸ ΓΕ· τὰ ἄρα ἀπὸ τῶν ΑΓ, ΓΕ τετράγωνα διπλάσιά gle) EFG is thus half a right-angle [Prop. 1.32]. Thus,
ἐστι τοῦ ἀπὸ ΑΓ. τοῖς δὲ ἀπὸ τῶν ΑΓ, ΓΕ ἴσον ἐστὶ τὸ ἀπὸ angle GEF [is] equal to EFG. So the side EG is also
τῆς ΕΑ τετράγωνον· ὀρθὴ γὰρ ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΓΕ γωνία· τὸ ἄρα equal to the (side) GF [Prop. 1.6]. Again, since the anἀπὸ τῆς ΕΑ διπλάσιόν ἐστι τοῦ ἀπὸ τῆς ΑΓ. πάλιν, ἐπεὶ ἴση gle at B is half a right-angle, and (angle) FDB (is) a
ἐστὶν ἡ ΕΗ τῇ ΗΖ, ἴσον καὶ τὸ ἀπὸ τῆς ΕΗ τῷ ἀπὸ τῆς ΗΖ· right-angle—for again it is equal to the internal and opτὰ ἄρα ἀπὸ τῶν ΕΗ, ΗΖ τετράγωνα διπλάσιά ἐστι τοῦ ἀπὸ posite (angle) ECB [Prop. 1.29]—the remaining (angle)
τῆς ΗΖ τετραγώνου. τοῖς δὲ ἀπὸ τῶν ΕΗ, ΗΖ τετραγώνοις BFD is half a right-angle [Prop. 1.32]. Thus, the angle at
ἴσον ἐστὶ τὸ ἀπὸ τῆς ΕΖ τετράγωνον· τὸ ἄρα ἀπὸ τῆς ΕΖ B (is) equal to DFB. So the side FD is also equal to the
τετράγωνον διπλάσιόν ἐστι τοῦ ἀπὸ τῆς ΗΖ. ἴση δὲ ἡ ΗΖ side DB [Prop. 1.6]. And since AC is equal to CE, the
τῇ ΓΔ· τὸ ἄρα ἀπὸ τῆς ΕΖ διπλάσιόν ἐστι τοῦ ἀπὸ τῆς ΓΔ. (square) on AC (is) also equal to the (square) on CE.
ἔστι δὲ καὶ τὸ ἀπὸ τῆς ΕΑ διπλάσιον τοῦ ἀπὸ τῆς ΑΓ· τὰ Thus, the (sum of the) squares on AC and CE is douἄρα ἀπὸ τῶν ΑΕ, ΕΖ τετράγωνα διπλάσιά ἐστι τῶν ἀπὸ τῶν ble the (square) on AC. And the square on EA is equal
ΑΓ, ΓΔ τετραγώνων. τοῖς δὲ ἀπὸ τῶν ΑΕ, ΕΖ ἴσον ἐστὶ to the (sum of the) squares on AC and CE. For angle
τὸ ἀπὸ τῆς ΑΖ τετράγωνον· ὀρθὴ γάρ ἐστιν ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΕΖ ACE (is) a right-angle [Prop. 1.47]. Thus, the (square)
γωνία· τὸ ἄρα ἀπὸ τῆς ΑΖ τετράγωνον διπλάσιόν ἐστι τῶν on EA is double the (square) on AC. Again, since EG
ἀπὸ τῶν ΑΓ, ΓΔ. τῷ δὲ ἀπὸ τῆς ΑΖ ἴσα τὰ ἀπὸ τῶν ΑΔ, is equal to GF, the (square) on EG (is) also equal to
ΔΖ· ὀρθὴ γὰρ ἡ πρὸς τῷ Δ γωνία· τὰ ἄρα ἀπὸ τῶν ΑΔ, ΔΖ the (square) on GF. Thus, the (sum of the squares) on
διπλάσιά ἐστι τῶν ἀπὸ τῶν ΑΓ, ΓΔ τετραγώνων. ἴση δὲ ἡ EG and GF is double the square on GF. And the square
ΔΖ τῇ ΔΒ· τὰ ἄρα ἀπὸ τῶν ΑΔ, ΔΒ τετράγωνα διπλάσιά on EF is equal to the (sum of the) squares on EG and
ἐστι τῶν ἀπὸ τῶν ΑΓ, ΓΔ τετράγώνων. GF [Prop. 1.47]. Thus, the square on EF is double the
᾿Εὰν ἄρα εὐθεῖα γραμμὴ τμηθῇ εἰς ἴσα καὶ ἄνισα, τὰ ἀπὸ (square) on GF. And GF (is) equal to CD [Prop. 1.34].
τῶν ἀνίσων τῆς ὅλης τμημάτων τετράγωνα διπλάσιά ἐστι Thus, the (square) on EF is double the (square) on CD.
τοῦ τε ἀπὸ τῆς ἡμισείας καὶ τοῦ ἀπὸ τῆς μεταξὺ τῶν τομῶν And the (square) on EA is also double the (square) on
τετραγώνου· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. AC. Thus, the (sum of the) squares on AE and EF is
double the (sum of the) squares on AC and CD. And
the square on AF is equal to the (sum of the squares)
on AE and EF. For the angle AEF is a right-angle
[Prop. 1.47]. Thus, the square on AF is double the (sum
of the squares) on AC and CD. And the (sum of the
squares) on AD and DF (is) equal to the (square) on
AF. For the angle at D is a right-angle [Prop. 1.47].
Thus, the (sum of the squares) on AD and DF is double
the (sum of the) squares on AC and CD. And DF (is)
equal to DB. Thus, the (sum of the) squares on AD and
DB is double the (sum of the) squares on AC and CD.
Thus, if a straight-line is cut into equal and unequal
(pieces) then the (sum of the) squares on the unequal
pieces of the whole (straight-line) is double the (sum of
the) square on half (the straight-line) and (the square) on
the (difference) between the (equal and unequal) pieces.
(Which is) the very thing it was required to show.
† This proposition is a geometric version of the algebraic identity: a
2 + b
2 = 2[([a + b]/2)2 + ([a + b]/2 − b)
2
].
60
STOIQEIWN bþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 2
iþ. Proposition 10†
᾿Εὰν εὐθεῖα γραμμὴ τμηθῇ δίχα, προστεθῇ δέ τις αὐτῇ If a straight-line is cut in half, and any straight-line
εὐθεῖα ἐπ᾿ εὐθείας, τὸ ἀπὸ τῆς ὅλης σὺν τῇ προσκειμένῃ added to it straight-on, then the sum of the square on
καὶ τὸ ἀπὸ τῆς προσκειμένης τὰ συναμφότερα τετράγωνα the whole (straight-line) with the (straight-line) having
διπλάσιά ἐστι τοῦ τε ἀπὸ τῆς ἡμισείας καὶ τοῦ ἀπὸ τῆς συγ- been added, and the (square) on the (straight-line) havκειμένης ἔκ τε τῆς ἡμισείας καὶ τῆς προσκειμένης ὡς ἀπὸ ing been added, is double the (sum of the square) on half
μιᾶς ἀναγραφέντος τετραγώνου. (the straight-line), and the square described on the sum
of half (the straight-line) and (straight-line) having been
added, as on one (complete straight-line).
Η
∆
Ε
Α Γ Β
Ζ
G
E
A C B
F
D
Εὐθεῖα γάρ τις ἡ ΑΒ τετμήσθω δίχα κατὰ τὸ Γ, προ- For let any straight-line AB have been cut in half at
σκείσθω δέ τις αὐτῇ εὐθεῖα ἐπ᾿ εὐθείας ἡ ΒΔ· λέγω, ὅτι τὰ (point) C, and let any straight-line BD have been added
ἀπὸ τῶν ΑΔ, ΔΒ τετράγωνα διπλάσιά ἐστι τῶν ἀπὸ τῶν to it straight-on. I say that the (sum of the) squares on
ΑΓ, ΓΔ τετραγώνων. AD and DB is double the (sum of the) squares on AC
῎Ηχθω γὰρ ἀπὸ τοῦ Γ σημείου τῇ ΑΒ πρὸς ὀρθὰς ἡ ΓΕ, and CD.
καὶ κείσθω ἴση ἑκατέρᾳ τῶν ΑΓ, ΓΒ, καὶ ἐπεζεύχθωσαν For let CE have been drawn from point C, at rightαἱ ΕΑ, ΕΒ· καὶ διὰ μὲν τοῦ Ε τῇ ΑΔ παράλληλος ἤχθω ἡ angles to AB [Prop. 1.11], and let it be made equal to
ΕΖ, διὰ δὲ τοῦ Δ τῇ ΓΕ παράλληλος ἤχθω ἡ ΖΔ. καὶ ἐπεὶ each of AC and CB [Prop. 1.3], and let EA and EB have
εἰς παραλλήλους εὐθείας τὰς ΕΓ, ΖΔ εὐθεῖά τις ἐνέπεσεν been joined. And let EF have been drawn through E,
ἡ ΕΖ, αἱ ὑπὸ ΓΕΖ, ΕΖΔ ἄρα δυσὶν ὀρθαῖς ἴσαι εἰσίν· αἱ parallel to AD [Prop. 1.31], and let FD have been drawn
ἄρα ὑπὸ ΖΕΒ, ΕΖΔ δύο ὀρθῶν ἐλάσσονές εἰσιν· αἱ δὲ through D, parallel to CE [Prop. 1.31]. And since some
ἀπ᾿ ἐλασσόνων ἢ δύο ὀρθῶν ἐκβαλλόμεναι συμπίπτουσιν· straight-line EF falls across the parallel straight-lines EC
αἱ ἄρα ΕΒ, ΖΔ ἐκβαλλόμεναι ἐπὶ τὰ Β, Δ μέρη συμ- and FD, the (internal angles) CEF and EFD are thus
πεσοῦνται. ἐκβεβλήσθωσαν καὶ συμπιπτέτωσαν κατὰ τὸ Η, equal to two right-angles [Prop. 1.29]. Thus, FEB and
καὶ ἐπεζεύχθω ἡ ΑΗ. καὶ ἐπεὶ ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ΑΓ τῇ ΓΕ, ἴση EFD are less than two right-angles. And (straight-lines)
ἐστὶ καὶ γωνία ἡ ὑπὸ ΕΑΓ τῇ ὑπὸ ΑΕΓ· καὶ ὀρθὴ ἡ πρὸς τῷ produced from (internal angles whose sum is) less than
Γ· ἡμίσεια ἄρα ὀρθῆς [ἐστιν] ἑκατέρα τῶν ὑπὸ ΕΑΓ, ΑΕΓ. two right-angles meet together [Post. 5]. Thus, being proδιὰ τὰ αὐτὰ δὴ καὶ ἑκατέρα τῶν ὑπὸ ΓΕΒ, ΕΒΓ ἡμίσειά ἐστιν duced in the direction of B and D, the (straight-lines)
ὀρθῆς· ὀρθὴ ἄρα ἐστὶν ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΕΒ. καὶ ἐπεὶ ἡμίσεια ὀρθῆς EB and FD will meet. Let them have been produced,
ἐστιν ἡ ὑπὸ ΕΒΓ, ἡμίσεια ἄρα ὀρθῆς καὶ ἡ ὑπὸ ΔΒΗ. ἔστι and let them meet together at G, and let AG have been
δὲ καὶ ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΔΗ ὀρθή· ἴση γάρ ἐστι τῇ ὑπὸ ΔΓΕ· ἐναλλὰξ joined. And since AC is equal to CE, angle EAC is also
γάρ· λοιπὴ ἅρα ἡ ὑπὸ ΔΗΒ ἡμίσειά ἐστιν ὀρθῆς· ἡ ἄρα ὑπὸ equal to (angle) AEC [Prop. 1.5]. And the (angle) at
ΔΗΒ τῇ ὑπὸ ΔΒΗ ἐστιν ἴση· ὥστε καὶ πλευρὰ ἡ ΒΔ πλευρᾷ C (is) a right-angle. Thus, EAC and AEC [are] each
τῇ ΗΔ ἐστιν ἴση. πάλιν, ἐπεὶ ἡ ὑπὸ ΕΗΖ ἡμίσειά ἐστιν half a right-angle [Prop. 1.32]. So, for the same (reaὀρθῆς, ὀρθὴ δὲ ἡ πρὸς τῷ Ζ· ἴση γάρ ἐστι τῇ ἀπεναντίον τῇ sons), CEB and EBC are also each half a right-angle.
πρὸς τῷ Γ· λοιπὴ ἄρα ἡ ὑπὸ ΖΕΗ ἡμίσειά ἐστιν ὀρθῆς· ἴση Thus, (angle) AEB is a right-angle. And since EBC
ἄρα ἡ ὑπὸ ΕΗΖ γωνία τῇ ὑπὸ ΖΕΗ· ὥστε καὶ πλευρὰ ἡ ΗΖ is half a right-angle, DBG (is) thus also half a rightπλευρᾷ τῇ ΕΖ ἐστιν ἴση. καὶ ἐπεὶ [ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ΕΓ τῇ ΓΑ], angle [Prop. 1.15]. And BDG is also a right-angle. For
ἴσον ἐστὶ [καὶ] τὸ ἀπὸ τῆς ΕΓ τετράγωνον τῷ ἀπὸ τῆς ΓΑ it is equal to DCE. For (they are) alternate (angles)
61
STOIQEIWN bþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 2
τετραγώνῳ· τὰ ἄρα ἀπὸ τῶν ΕΓ, ΓΑ τετράγωνα διπλάσιά [Prop. 1.29]. Thus, the remaining (angle) DGB is half
ἐστι τοῦ ἀπὸ τῆς ΓΑ τετραγώνου. τοῖς δὲ ἀπὸ τῶν ΕΓ, ΓΑ a right-angle. Thus, DGB is equal to DBG. So side BD
ἴσον ἐστὶ τὸ ἀπὸ τῆς ΕΑ· τὸ ἄρα ἀπὸ τῆς ΕΑ τετράγωνον is also equal to side GD [Prop. 1.6]. Again, since EGF is
διπλάσιόν ἐστι τοῦ ἀπὸ τῆς ΑΓ τετραγώνου. πάλιν, ἐπεὶ ἴση half a right-angle, and the (angle) at F (is) a right-angle,
ἐστὶν ἡ ΖΗ τῇ ΕΖ, ἴσον ἐστὶ καὶ τὸ ἀπὸ τῆς ΖΗ τῷ ἀπὸ τῆς for it is equal to the opposite (angle) at C [Prop. 1.34],
ΖΕ· τὰ ἄρα ἀπὸ τῶν ΗΖ, ΖΕ διπλάσιά ἐστι τοῦ ἀπὸ τῆς ΕΖ. the remaining (angle) FEG is thus half a right-angle.
τοῖς δὲ ἀπὸ τῶν ΗΖ, ΖΕ ἴσον ἐστὶ τὸ ἀπὸ τῆς ΕΗ· τὸ ἄρα Thus, angle EGF (is) equal to FEG. So the side GF
ἀπὸ τῆς ΕΗ διπλάσιόν ἐστι τοῦ ἀπὸ τῆς ΕΖ. ἴση δὲ ἡ ΕΖ τῇ is also equal to the side EF [Prop. 1.6]. And since [EC
ΓΔ· τὸ ἄρα ἀπὸ τῆς ΕΗ τετράγωνον διπλάσιόν ἐστι τοῦ ἀπὸ is equal to CA] the square on EC is [also] equal to the
τῆς ΓΔ. ἐδείχθη δὲ καὶ τὸ ἀπὸ τῆς ΕΑ διπλάσιον τοῦ ἀπὸ square on CA. Thus, the (sum of the) squares on EC
τῆς ΑΓ· τὰ ἄρα ἀπὸ τῶν ΑΕ, ΕΗ τετράγωνα διπλάσιά ἐστι and CA is double the square on CA. And the (square)
τῶν ἀπὸ τῶν ΑΓ, ΓΔ τετραγώνων. τοῖς δὲ ἀπὸ τῶν ΑΕ, on EA is equal to the (sum of the squares) on EC and
ΕΗ τετραγώνοις ἴσον ἐστὶ τὸ ἀπὸ τῆς ΑΗ τετράγωνον· τὸ CA [Prop. 1.47]. Thus, the square on EA is double the
ἄρα ἀπὸ τῆς ΑΗ διπλάσιόν ἐστι τῶν ἀπὸ τῶν ΑΓ, ΓΔ. τῷ square on AC. Again, since FG is equal to EF, the
δὲ ἀπὸ τῆς ΑΗ ἴσα ἐστὶ τὰ ἀπὸ τῶν ΑΔ, ΔΗ· τὰ ἄρα ἀπὸ (square) on FG is also equal to the (square) on FE.
τῶν ΑΔ, ΔΗ [τετράγωνα] διπλάσιά ἐστι τῶν ἀπὸ τῶν ΑΓ, Thus, the (sum of the squares) on GF and FE is douΓΔ [τετραγώνων]. ἴση δὲ ἡ ΔΗ τῇ ΔΒ· τὰ ἄρα ἀπὸ τῶν ble the (square) on EF. And the (square) on EG is equal
ΑΔ, ΔΒ [τετράγωνα] διπλάσιά ἐστι τῶν ἀπὸ τῶν ΑΓ, ΓΔ to the (sum of the squares) on GF and FE [Prop. 1.47].
τετραγώνων. Thus, the (square) on EG is double the (square) on EF.
᾿Εὰν ἄρα εὐθεῖα γραμμὴ τμηθῇ δίχα, προστεθῇ δέ τις And EF (is) equal to CD [Prop. 1.34]. Thus, the square
αὐτῇ εὐθεῖα ἐπ᾿ εὐθείας, τὸ ἀπὸ τῆς ὅλης σὺν τῇ προ- on EG is double the (square) on CD. But it was also
σκειμένῃ καὶ τὸ ἀπὸ τῆς προσκειμένης τὰ συναμφότερα shown that the (square) on EA (is) double the (square)
τετράγωνα διπλάσιά ἐστι τοῦ τε ἀπὸ τῆς ἡμισείας καὶ τοῦ on AC. Thus, the (sum of the) squares on AE and EG is
ἀπὸ τῆς συγκειμένης ἔκ τε τῆς ἡμισείας καὶ τῆς προ- double the (sum of the) squares on AC and CD. And the
σκειμένης ὡς ἀπὸ μιᾶς ἀναγραφέντος τετραγώνου· ὅπερ square on AG is equal to the (sum of the) squares on AE
ἔδει δεῖξαι. and EG [Prop. 1.47]. Thus, the (square) on AG is double
the (sum of the squares) on AC and CD. And the (sum
of the squares) on AD and DG is equal to the (square)
on AG [Prop. 1.47]. Thus, the (sum of the) [squares] on
AD and DG is double the (sum of the) [squares] on AC
and CD. And DG (is) equal to DB. Thus, the (sum of
the) [squares] on AD and DB is double the (sum of the)
squares on AC and CD.
Thus, if a straight-line is cut in half, and any straightline added to it straight-on, then the sum of the square
on the whole (straight-line) with the (straight-line) having been added, and the (square) on the (straight-line)
having been added, is double the (sum of the square) on
half (the straight-line), and the square described on the
sum of half (the straight-line) and (straight-line) having
been added, as on one (complete straight-line). (Which
is) the very thing it was required to show.
† This proposition is a geometric version of the algebraic identity: (2 a + b)
2 + b
2 = 2 [a
2 + (a + b)
2
].
iaþ. Proposition 11†
Τὴν δοθεῖσαν εὐθεῖαν τεμεῖν ὥστε τὸ ὑπὸ τῆς ὅλης καὶ To cut a given straight-line such that the rectangle
τοῦ ἑτέρου τῶν τμημάτων περιεχόμενον ὀρθογώνιον ἴσον contained by the whole (straight-line), and one of the
εἶναι τῷ ἀπὸ τοῦ λοιποῦ τμήματος τετραγώνῳ. pieces (of the straight-line), is equal to the square on the
remaining piece.
62
STOIQEIWN bþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 2
Ε
Γ
Ζ
Β
∆
Α
Η
Θ
Κ
E
F G
A
C K
H B
D
῎Εστω ἡ δοθεῖσα εὐθεῖα ἡ ΑΒ· δεῖ δὴ τὴν ΑΒ τεμεῖν Let AB be the given straight-line. So it is required to
ὥστε τὸ ὑπὸ τῆς ὅλης καὶ τοῦ ἑτέρου τῶν τμημάτων cut AB such that the rectangle contained by the whole
περιεχόμενον ὀρθογώνιον ἴσον εἶναι τῷ ἀπὸ τοῦ λοιποῦ (straight-line), and one of the pieces (of the straightτμήματος τετραγώνῳ. line), is equal to the square on the remaining piece.
᾿Αναγεγράφθω γὰρ ἀπὸ τῆς ΑΒ τετράγωνον τὸ ΑΒΔΓ, For let the square ABDC have been described on AB
καὶ τετμήσθω ἡ ΑΓ δίχα κατὰ τὸ Ε σημεῖον, καὶ ἐπεζεύχθω [Prop. 1.46], and let AC have been cut in half at point
ἡ ΒΕ, καὶ διήχθω ἡ ΓΑ ἐπὶ τὸ Ζ, καὶ κείσθω τῇ ΒΕ ἴση ἡ E [Prop. 1.10], and let BE have been joined. And let
ΕΖ, καὶ ἀναγεγράφθω ἀπὸ τῆς ΑΖ τετράγωνον τὸ ΖΘ, καὶ CA have been drawn through to (point) F, and let EF
διήχθω ἡ ΗΘ ἐπὶ τὸ Κ· λέγω, ὅτι ἡ ΑΒ τέτμηται κατὰ τὸ Θ, be made equal to BE [Prop. 1.3]. And let the square
ὥστε τὸ ὑπὸ τῶν ΑΒ, ΒΘ περιεχόμενον ὀρθογώνιον ἴσον FH have been described on AF [Prop. 1.46], and let GH
ποιεῖν τῷ ἀπὸ τῆς ΑΘ τετραγώνῳ. have been drawn through to (point) K. I say that AB has
᾿Επεὶ γὰρ εὐθεῖα ἡ ΑΓ τέτμηται δίχα κατὰ τὸ Ε, been cut at H such as to make the rectangle contained by
πρόσκειται δὲ αὐτῇ ἡ ΖΑ, τὸ ἄρα ὑπὸ τῶν ΓΖ, ΖΑ πε- AB and BH equal to the square on AH.
ριεχόμενον ὀρθογώνιον μετὰ τοῦ ἀπὸ τῆς ΑΕ τετραγώνου For since the straight-line AC has been cut in half at
ἴσον ἐστὶ τῷ ἀπὸ τῆς ΕΖ τετραγώνῳ. ἴση δὲ ἡ ΕΖ τῇ ΕΒ· E, and FA has been added to it, the rectangle contained
τὸ ἄρα ὑπὸ τῶν ΓΖ, ΖΑ μετὰ τοῦ ἀπὸ τῆς ΑΕ ἴσον ἐστὶ by CF and FA, plus the square on AE, is thus equal to
τῷ ἀπὸ ΕΒ. ἀλλὰ τῷ ἀπὸ ΕΒ ἴσα ἐστὶ τὰ ἀπὸ τῶν ΒΑ, the square on EF [Prop. 2.6]. And EF (is) equal to EB.
ΑΕ· ὀρθὴ γὰρ ἡ πρὸς τῷ Α γωνία· τὸ ἄρα ὑπὸ τῶν ΓΖ, Thus, the (rectangle contained) by CF and FA, plus the
ΖΑ μετὰ τοῦ ἀπὸ τῆς ΑΕ ἴσον ἐστὶ τοῖς ἀπὸ τῶν ΒΑ, ΑΕ. (square) on AE, is equal to the (square) on EB. But,
κοινὸν ἀφῃρήσθω τὸ ἀπὸ τῆς ΑΕ· λοιπὸν ἄρα τὸ ὑπὸ τῶν the (sum of the squares) on BA and AE is equal to the
ΓΖ, ΖΑ περιεχόμενον ὀρθογώνιον ἴσον ἐστὶ τῷ ἀπὸ τῆς ΑΒ (square) on EB. For the angle at A (is) a right-angle
τετραγώνῳ. καί ἐστι τὸ μὲν ὑπὸ τῶν ΓΖ, ΖΑ τὸ ΖΚ· ἴση [Prop. 1.47]. Thus, the (rectangle contained) by CF and
γὰρ ἡ ΑΖ τῇ ΖΗ· τὸ δὲ ἀπὸ τῆς ΑΒ τὸ ΑΔ· τὸ ἄρα ΖΚ ἴσον FA, plus the (square) on AE, is equal to the (sum of
ἐστὶ τῷ ΑΔ. κοινὸν ἀρῃρήσθω τὸ ΑΚ· λοιπὸν ἄρα τὸ ΖΘ the squares) on BA and AE. Let the square on AE have
τῷ ΘΔ ἴσον ἐστίν. καί ἐστι τὸ μὲν ΘΔ τὸ ὑπὸ τῶν ΑΒ, been subtracted from both. Thus, the remaining rectanΒΘ· ἴση γὰρ ἡ ΑΒ τῇ ΒΔ· τὸ δὲ ΖΘ τὸ ἀπὸ τῆς ΑΘ· τὸ gle contained by CF and FA is equal to the square on
ἄρα ὑπὸ τῶν ΑΒ, ΒΘ περιεχόμενον ὀρθογώνιον ἴσον ἐστὶ AB. And FK is the (rectangle contained) by CF and
τῷ ἀπὸ ΘΑ τετραγώνῳ. FA. For AF (is) equal to FG. And AD (is) the (square)
῾Η ἄρα δοθεῖσα εὐθεῖα ἡ ΑΒ τέτμηται κατὰ τὸ Θ ὥστε on AB. Thus, the (rectangle) FK is equal to the (square)
τὸ ὑπὸ τῶν ΑΒ, ΒΘ περιεχόμενον ὀρθογώνιον ἴσον ποιεῖν AD. Let (rectangle) AK have been subtracted from both.
τῷ ἀπὸ τῆς ΘΑ τετραγώνῳ· ὅπερ ἔδει ποιῆσαι. Thus, the remaining (square) FH is equal to the (rectangle) HD. And HD is the (rectangle contained) by AB
and BH. For AB (is) equal to BD. And FH (is) the
(square) on AH. Thus, the rectangle contained by AB
63
STOIQEIWN bþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 2
and BH is equal to the square on HA.
Thus, the given straight-line AB has been cut at
(point) H such as to make the rectangle contained by
AB and BH equal to the square on HA. (Which is) the
very thing it was required to do.
† This manner of cutting a straight-line—so that the ratio of the whole to the larger piece is equal to the ratio of the larger to the smaller piece—is
sometimes called the “Golden Section”.
ibþ. Proposition 12†
᾿Εν τοῖς ἀμβλυγωνίοις τριγώνοις τὸ ἀπὸ τῆς τὴν In obtuse-angled triangles, the square on the side subἀμβλεῖαν γωνίαν ὑποτεινούσης πλευρᾶς τετράγωνον μεῖζόν tending the obtuse angle is greater than the (sum of the)
ἐστι τῶν ἀπὸ τῶν τὴν ἀμβλεῖαν γωνίαν περιεχουσῶν squares on the sides containing the obtuse angle by twice
πλευρῶν τετραγώνων τῷ περιεχομένῳ δὶς ὑπὸ τε μιᾶς τῶν the (rectangle) contained by one of the sides around the
περὶ τὴν ἀμβλεῖαν γωνίαν, ἐφ᾿ ἣν ἡ κάθετος πίπτει, καὶ τῆς obtuse angle, to which a perpendicular (straight-line)
ἀπολαμβανομένης ἐκτὸς ὑπὸ τῆς καθέτου πρὸς τῇ ἀμβλείᾳ falls, and the (straight-line) cut off outside (the triangle)
γωνίᾳ. by the perpendicular (straight-line) towards the obtuse
angle.
Β
∆ Α Γ
B
D A C
῎Εστω ἀμβλυγώνιον τρίγωνον τὸ ΑΒΓ ἀμβλεῖαν ἔχον Let ABC be an obtuse-angled triangle, having the anτὴν ὑπὸ ΒΑΓ, καὶ ἤχθω ἀπὸ τοῦ Β σημείου ἐπὶ τὴν ΓΑ gle BAC obtuse. And let BD be drawn from point B,
ἐκβληθεῖσαν κάθετος ἡ ΒΔ. λέγω, ὅτι τὸ ἀπὸ τῆς ΒΓ perpendicular to CA produced [Prop. 1.12]. I say that
τετράγωνον μεῖζόν ἐστι τῶν ἀπὸ τῶν ΒΑ, ΑΓ τετραγώνων the square on BC is greater than the (sum of the) squares
τῷ δὶς ὑπὸ τῶν ΓΑ, ΑΔ περιεχομένῳ ὀρθογωνίῳ. on BA and AC, by twice the rectangle contained by CA
᾿Επεὶ γὰρ εὐθεῖα ἡ ΓΔ τέτμηται, ὡς ἔτυχεν, κατὰ τὸ Α and AD.
σημεῖον, τὸ ἄρα ἀπὸ τῆς ΔΓ ἴσον ἐστὶ τοῖς ἀπὸ τῶν ΓΑ, For since the straight-line CD has been cut, at ranΑΔ τετραγώνοις καὶ τῷ δὶς ὑπὸ τῶν ΓΑ, ΑΔ περιεχομένῳ dom, at point A, the (square) on DC is thus equal to
ὀρθογωνίῳ. κοινὸν προσκείσθω τὸ ἀπὸ τῆς ΔΒ· τὰ ἄρα the (sum of the) squares on CA and AD, and twice the
ἀπὸ τῶν ΓΔ, ΔΒ ἴσα ἐστὶ τοῖς τε ἀπὸ τῶν ΓΑ, ΑΔ, ΔΒ τε- rectangle contained by CA and AD [Prop. 2.4]. Let the
τραγώνοις καὶ τῷ δὶς ὑπὸ τῶν ΓΑ, ΑΔ [περιεχομένῳ ὀρθο- (square) on DB have been added to both. Thus, the (sum
γωνίῳ]. ἀλλὰ τοῖς μὲν ἀπὸ τῶν ΓΔ, ΔΒ ἴσον ἐστὶ τὸ ἀπὸ of the squares) on CD and DB is equal to the (sum of
τῆς ΓΒ· ὀρθὴ γὰρ ἡ προς τῷ Δ γωνία· τοῖς δὲ ἀπὸ τῶν ΑΔ, the) squares on CA, AD, and DB, and twice the [rectΔΒ ἴσον τὸ ἀπὸ τῆς ΑΒ· τὸ ἄρα ἀπὸ τῆς ΓΒ τετράγωνον angle contained] by CA and AD. But, the (square) on
ἴσον ἐστὶ τοῖς τε ἀπὸ τῶν ΓΑ, ΑΒ τετραγώνοις καὶ τῷ δὶς CB is equal to the (sum of the squares) on CD and DB.
ὑπὸ τῶν ΓΑ, ΑΔ περιεχομένῳ ὀρθογωνίῳ· ὥστε τὸ ἀπὸ τῆς For the angle at D (is) a right-angle [Prop. 1.47]. And
ΓΒ τετράγωνον τῶν ἀπὸ τῶν ΓΑ, ΑΒ τετραγώνων μεῖζόν the (square) on AB (is) equal to the (sum of the squares)
ἐστι τῷ δὶς ὑπὸ τῶν ΓΑ, ΑΔ περιεχομένῳ ὀρθογωνίῳ. on AD and DB [Prop. 1.47]. Thus, the square on CB
᾿Εν ἄρα τοῖς ἀμβλυγωνίοις τριγώνοις τὸ ἀπὸ τῆς τὴν is equal to the (sum of the) squares on CA and AB, and
ἀμβλεῖαν γωνίαν ὑποτεινούσης πλευρᾶς τετράγωνον μεῖζόν twice the rectangle contained by CA and AD. So the
ἐστι τῶν ἀπὸ τῶν τὴν ἀμβλεῖαν γωνίαν περιεχουσῶν square on CB is greater than the (sum of the) squares on
64
STOIQEIWN bþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 2
πλευρῶν τετραγώνων τῷ περιχομένῳ δὶς ὑπό τε μιᾶς τῶν CA and AB by twice the rectangle contained by CA and
περὶ τὴν ἀμβλεῖαν γωνίαν, ἐφ᾿ ἣν ἡ κάθετος πίπτει, καὶ τῆς AD.
ἀπολαμβανομένης ἐκτὸς ὑπὸ τῆς καθέτου πρὸς τῇ ἀμβλείᾳ Thus, in obtuse-angled triangles, the square on the
γωνίᾳ· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. side subtending the obtuse angle is greater than the (sum
of the) squares on the sides containing the obtuse angle by twice the (rectangle) contained by one of the
sides around the obtuse angle, to which a perpendicular (straight-line) falls, and the (straight-line) cut off outside (the triangle) by the perpendicular (straight-line) towards the obtuse angle. (Which is) the very thing it was
required to show.
† This proposition is equivalent to the well-known cosine formula: BC 2 = AB 2 + AC 2 − 2 AB AC cos BAC, since cos BAC = −AD/AB.
igþ. Proposition 13†
᾿Εν τοῖς ὀξυγωνίοις τριγώνοις τὸ ἀπὸ τῆς τὴν ὀξεῖαν In acute-angled triangles, the square on the side subγωνίαν ὑποτεινούσης πλευρᾶς τετράγωνον ἔλαττόν ἐστι tending the acute angle is less than the (sum of the)
τῶν ἀπὸ τῶν τὴν ὀξεῖαν γωνίαν περιεχουσῶν πλευρῶν τε- squares on the sides containing the acute angle by twice
τραγώνων τῷ περιεχομένῳ δὶς ὑπό τε μιᾶς τῶν περὶ τὴν the (rectangle) contained by one of the sides around the
ὀξεῖαν γωνίαν, ἐφ᾿ ἣν ἡ κάθετος πίπτει, καὶ τῆς ἀπολαμβα- acute angle, to which a perpendicular (straight-line) falls,
νομένης ἐντὸς ὑπὸ τῆς καθέτου πρὸς τῇ ὀξείᾳ γωνίᾳ. and the (straight-line) cut off inside (the triangle) by the
perpendicular (straight-line) towards the acute angle.
Β
Α
∆ Γ B D C
A
῎Εστω ὀξυγώνιον τρίγωνον τὸ ΑΒΓ ὀξεῖαν ἔχον τὴν Let ABC be an acute-angled triangle, having the anπρὸς τῷ Β γωνίαν, καὶ ἤχθω ἀπὸ τοῦ Α σημείου ἐπὶ τὴν gle at (point) B acute. And let AD have been drawn from
ΒΓ κάθετος ἡ ΑΔ· λέγω, ὅτι τὸ ἀπὸ τῆς ΑΓ τετράγωνον point A, perpendicular to BC [Prop. 1.12]. I say that the
ἔλαττόν ἐστι τῶν ἀπὸ τῶν ΓΒ, ΒΑ τετραγώνων τῷ δὶς ὑπὸ square on AC is less than the (sum of the) squares on
τῶν ΓΒ, ΒΔ περιεχομένῳ ὀρθογωνίῳ. CB and BA, by twice the rectangle contained by CB and
᾿Επεὶ γὰρ εὐθεῖα ἡ ΓΒ τέτμηται, ὡς ἔτυχεν, κατὰ τὸ BD.
Δ, τὰ ἄρα ἀπὸ τῶν ΓΒ, ΒΔ τετράγωνα ἴσα ἐστὶ τῷ τε For since the straight-line CB has been cut, at ranδὶς ὑπὸ τῶν ΓΒ, ΒΔ περιεχομένῳ ὀρθογωνίῳ καὶ τῷ ἀπὸ dom, at (point) D, the (sum of the) squares on CB and
τῆς ΔΓ τετραγώνῳ. κοινὸν προσκείσθω τὸ ἀπὸ τῆς ΔΑ BD is thus equal to twice the rectangle contained by CB
τετράγωνον· τὰ ἄρα ἀπὸ τῶν ΓΒ, ΒΔ, ΔΑ τετράγωνα ἴσα and BD, and the square on DC [Prop. 2.7]. Let the
ἐστὶ τῷ τε δὶς ὑπὸ τῶν ΓΒ, ΒΔ περιεχομένῳ ὀρθογωνίῳ square on DA have been added to both. Thus, the (sum
καὶ τοῖς ἀπὸ τῶν ΑΔ, ΔΓ τετραγώνιος. ἀλλὰ τοῖς μὲν ἀπὸ of the) squares on CB, BD, and DA is equal to twice
τῶν ΒΔ, ΔΑ ἴσον τὸ ἀπὸ τῆς ΑΒ· ὀρθὴ γὰρ ἡ πρὸς τῷ Δ the rectangle contained by CB and BD, and the (sum of
γωνίᾳ· τοῖς δὲ ἀπὸ τῶν ΑΔ, ΔΓ ἴσον τὸ ἀπὸ τῆς ΑΓ· τὰ the) squares on AD and DC. But, the (square) on AB
ἄρα ἀπὸ τῶν ΓΒ, ΒΑ ἴσα ἐστὶ τῷ τε ἀπὸ τῆς ΑΓ καὶ τῷ δὶς (is) equal to the (sum of the squares) on BD and DA.
ὑπὸ τῶν ΓΒ, ΒΔ· ὥστε μόνον τὸ ἀπὸ τῆς ΑΓ ἔλαττόν ἐστι For the angle at (point) D is a right-angle [Prop. 1.47].
65
STOIQEIWN bþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 2
τῶν ἀπὸ τῶν ΓΒ, ΒΑ τετραγώνων τῷ δὶς ὑπὸ τῶν ΓΒ, ΒΔ And the (square) on AC (is) equal to the (sum of the
περιεχομένῳ ὀρθογωνίῳ. squares) on AD and DC [Prop. 1.47]. Thus, the (sum of
᾿Εν ἄρα τοῖς ὀξυγωνίοις τριγώνοις τὸ ἀπὸ τῆς τὴν ὀξεῖαν the squares) on CB and BA is equal to the (square) on
γωνίαν ὑποτεινούσης πλευρᾶς τετράγωνον ἔλαττόν ἐστι AC, and twice the (rectangle contained) by CB and BD.
τῶν ἀπὸ τῶν τὴν ὀξεῖαν γωνίαν περιεχουσῶν πλευρῶν τε- So the (square) on AC alone is less than the (sum of the)
τραγώνων τῷ περιεχομένῳ δὶς ὑπό τε μιᾶς τῶν περὶ τὴν squares on CB and BA by twice the rectangle contained
ὀξεῖαν γωνίαν, ἐφ᾿ ἣν ἡ κάθετος πίπτει, καὶ τῆς ἀπολαμβα- by CB and BD.
νομένης ἐντὸς ὑπὸ τῆς καθέτου πρὸς τῇ ὀξείᾳ γωνίᾳ· ὅπερ Thus, in acute-angled triangles, the square on the side
ἔδει δεῖξαι. subtending the acute angle is less than the (sum of the)
squares on the sides containing the acute angle by twice
the (rectangle) contained by one of the sides around the
acute angle, to which a perpendicular (straight-line) falls,
and the (straight-line) cut off inside (the triangle) by
the perpendicular (straight-line) towards the acute angle.
(Which is) the very thing it was required to show.
† This proposition is equivalent to the well-known cosine formula: AC 2 = AB 2 + BC 2 − 2 AB BC cos ABC, since cos ABC = BD/AB.
idþ. Proposition 14
Τῷ δοθέντι εὐθυγράμμῳ ἴσον τετράγωνον συστήσας- To construct a square equal to a given rectilinear figθαι. ure.
Θ
Α
Ε Β
Γ ∆
Ζ Η
H
A
B
C
G
E F
D
῎Εστω τὸ δοθὲν εὐθύγραμμον τὸ Α· δεῖ δὴ τῷ Α Let A be the given rectilinear figure. So it is required
εὐθυγράμμῳ ἴσον τετράγωνον συστήσασθαι. to construct a square equal to the rectilinear figure A.
Συνεστάτω γὰρ τῷ Α ἐυθυγράμμῳ ἴσον παραλληλό- For let the right-angled parallelogram BD, equal to
γραμμον ὀρθογώνιον τὸ ΒΔ· εἰ μὲν οὖν ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ΒΕ the rectilinear figure A, have been constructed [Prop.
τῇ ΕΔ, γεγονὸς ἂν εἴη τὸ ἐπιταχθέν. συνέσταται γὰρ τῷ 1.45]. Therefore, if BE is equal to ED then that (which)
Α εὐθυγράμμῳ ἴσον τετράγωνον τὸ ΒΔ· εἰ δὲ οὔ, μία τῶν was prescribed has taken place. For the square BD, equal
ΒΕ, ΕΔ μείζων ἐστίν. ἔστω μείζων ἡ ΒΕ, καὶ ἐκβεβλήσθω to the rectilinear figure A, has been constructed. And if
ἐπὶ τὸ Ζ, καὶ κείσθω τῇ ΕΔ ἴση ἡ ΕΖ, καὶ τετμήσθω ἡ ΒΖ not, then one of the (straight-lines) BE or ED is greater
δίχα κατὰ τὸ Η, καὶ κέντρῳ τῷ Η, διαστήματι δὲ ἑνὶ τῶν (than the other). Let BE be greater, and let it have
ΗΒ, ΗΖ ἡμικύκλιον γεγράφθω τὸ ΒΘΖ, καὶ ἐκβεβλήσθω ἡ been produced to F, and let EF be made equal to ED
ΔΕ ἐπὶ τὸ Θ, καὶ ἐπεζεύχθω ἡ ΗΘ. [Prop. 1.3]. And let BF have been cut in half at (point)
᾿Επεὶ οὖν εὐθεῖα ἡ ΒΖ τέτμηται εἰς μὲν ἴσα κατὰ τὸ Η, εἰς G [Prop. 1.10]. And, with center G, and radius one of
δὲ ἄνισα κατὰ τὸ Ε, τὸ ἄρα ὑπὸ τῶν ΒΕ, ΕΖ περιεχόμενον the (straight-lines) GB or GF, let the semi-circle BHF
ὀρθογώνιον μετὰ τοῦ ἀπὸ τῆς ΕΗ τετραγώνου ἴσον ἐστὶ have been drawn. And let DE have been produced to H,
τῷ ἀπὸ τῆς ΗΖ τετραγώνῳ. ἴση δὲ ἡ ΗΖ τῇ ΗΘ· τὸ ἄρα and let GH have been joined.
ὑπὸ τῶν ΒΕ, ΕΖ μετὰ τοῦ ἀπὸ τῆς ΗΕ ἴσον ἐστὶ τῷ ἀπὸ Therefore, since the straight-line BF has been cut—
τῆς ΗΘ. τῷ δὲ ἀπὸ τῆς ΗΘ ἴσα ἐστὶ τὰ ἀπὸ τῶν ΘΕ, ΕΗ equally at G, and unequally at E—the rectangle con66
STOIQEIWN bþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 2
τετράγωνα· τὸ ἄρα ὑπὸ τῶν ΒΕ, ΕΖ μετὰ τοῦ ἀπὸ ΗΕ ἴσα tained by BE and EF, plus the square on EG, is thus
ἐστὶ τοῖς ἀπὸ τῶν ΘΕ, ΕΗ. κοινὸν ἀφῃρήσθω τὸ ἀπὸ τῆς ΗΕ equal to the square on GF [Prop. 2.5]. And GF (is) equal
τετράγωνον· λοιπὸν ἄρα τὸ ὑπὸ τῶν ΒΕ, ΕΖ περιεχόμενον to GH. Thus, the (rectangle contained) by BE and EF,
ὄρθογώνιον ἴσον ἐστὶ τῷ ἀπὸ τῆς ΕΘ τετραγώνῳ. ἀλλὰ τὸ plus the (square) on GE, is equal to the (square) on GH.
ὑπὸ τῶν ΒΕ, ΕΖ τὸ ΒΔ ἐστιν· ἴση γὰρ ἡ ΕΖ τῇ ΕΔ· τὸ And the (sum of the) squares on HE and EG is equal to
ἄρα ΒΔ παραλληλόγραμμον ἴσον ἐστὶ τῷ ἀπὸ τῆς ΘΕ τε- the (square) on GH [Prop. 1.47]. Thus, the (rectangle
τραγώνῳ. ἴσον δὲ τὸ ΒΔ τῷ Α εὐθυγράμμῳ. καὶ τὸ Α ἄρα contained) by BE and EF, plus the (square) on GE, is
εὐθύγραμμον ἴσον ἐστὶ τῷ ἀπὸ τῆς ΕΘ ἀναγραφησομένῳ equal to the (sum of the squares) on HE and EG. Let
τετραγώνῳ. the square on GE have been taken from both. Thus, the
Τῷ ἄρα δοθέντι εὐθυγράμμῳ τῷ Α ἴσον τετράγωνον remaining rectangle contained by BE and EF is equal to
συνέσταται τὸ ἀπὸ τῆς ΕΘ ἀναγραφησόμενον· ὅπερ ἔδει the square on EH. But, BD is the (rectangle contained)
ποιῆσαι. by BE and EF. For EF (is) equal to ED. Thus, the parallelogram BD is equal to the square on HE. And BD
(is) equal to the rectilinear figure A. Thus, the rectilinear figure A is also equal to the square (which) can be
described on EH.
Thus, a square—(namely), that (which) can be described on EH—has been constructed, equal to the given
rectilinear figure A. (Which is) the very thing it was required to do.
67
68
ELEMENTS BOOK 3
Fundamentals of Plane Geometry Involving
Circles
69
STOIQEIWN gþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 3
VOroi. Definitions
αʹ. ῎Ισοι κύκλοι εἰσίν, ὧν αἱ διάμετροι ἴσαι εἰσίν, ἢ ὧν αἱ 1. Equal circles are (circles) whose diameters are
ἐκ τῶν κέντρων ἴσαι εἰσίν. equal, or whose (distances) from the centers (to the cirβʹ. Εὐθεῖα κύκλου ἐφάπτεσθαι λέγεται, ἥτις ἁπτομένη cumferences) are equal (i.e., whose radii are equal).
τοῦ κύκλου καὶ ἐκβαλλομένη οὐ τέμνει τὸν κύκλον. 2. A straight-line said to touch a circle is any (straightγʹ. Κύκλοι ἐφάπτεσθαι ἀλλήλων λέγονται οἵτινες ἁπτό- line) which, meeting the circle and being produced, does
μενοι ἀλλήλων οὐ τέμνουσιν ἀλλήλους. not cut the circle.
δʹ. ᾿Εν κύκλῳ ἴσον ἀπέχειν ἀπὸ τοῦ κέντρου εὐθεῖαι 3. Circles said to touch one another are any (circles)
λέγονται, ὅταν αἱ ἀπὸ τοῦ κέντρου ἐπ᾿ αὐτὰς κάθετοι which, meeting one another, do not cut one another.
ἀγόμεναι ἴσαι ὦσιν. 4. In a circle, straight-lines are said to be equally far
εʹ. Μεῖζον δὲ ἀπέχειν λέγεται, ἐφ᾿ ἣν ἡ μείζων κάθετος from the center when the perpendiculars drawn to them
πίπτει. from the center are equal.
ϛʹ. Τμῆμα κύκλου ἐστὶ τὸ περιεχόμενον σχῆμα ὑπό τε 5. And (that straight-line) is said to be further (from
εὐθείας καὶ κύκλου περιφερείας. the center) on which the greater perpendicular falls
ζʹ. Τμήματος δὲ γωνία ἐστὶν ἡ περιεχομένη ὑπό τε (from the center).
εὐθείας καὶ κύκλου περιφερείας. 6. A segment of a circle is the figure contained by a
ηʹ. ᾿Εν τμήματι δὲ γωνία ἐστίν, ὅταν ἐπὶ τῆς περι- straight-line and a circumference of a circle.
φερείας τοῦ τμήματος ληφθῇ τι σημεῖον καὶ ἀπ᾿ αὐτοῦ ἐπὶ 7. And the angle of a segment is that contained by a
τὰ πέρατα τῆς εὐθείας, ἥ ἐστι βάσις τοῦ τμήματος, ἐπι- straight-line and a circumference of a circle.
ζευχθῶσιν εὐθεῖαι, ἡ περιεχομένη γωνία ὑπὸ τῶν ἐπιζευ- 8. And the angle in a segment is the angle contained
χθεισῶν εὐθειῶν. by the joined straight-lines, when any point is taken on
θʹ. ῞Οταν δὲ αἱ περιέχουσαι τὴν γωνίαν εὐθεῖαι ἀπο- the circumference of a segment, and straight-lines are
λαμβάνωσί τινα περιφέρειαν, ἐπ᾿ ἐκείνης λέγεται βεβηκέναι joined from it to the ends of the straight-line which is
ἡ γωνία. the base of the segment.
ιʹ. Τομεὺς δὲ κύκλου ἐστίν, ὅταν πρὸς τῷ κέντρῷ τοῦ 9. And when the straight-lines containing an angle
κύκλου συσταθῇ γωνία, τὸ περιεχόμενον σχῆμα ὑπό τε τῶν cut off some circumference, the angle is said to stand
τὴν γωνίαν περιεχουσῶν εὐθειῶν καὶ τῆς ἀπολαμβανομένης upon that (circumference).
ὑπ᾿ αὐτῶν περιφερείας. 10. And a sector of a circle is the figure contained by
ιαʹ. ῞Ομοία τμήματα κύκλων ἐστὶ τὰ δεχόμενα γωνίας the straight-lines surrounding an angle, and the circumἴσας, ἤ ἐν οἷς αἱ γωνίαι ἴσαι ἀλλήλαις εἰσίν. ference cut off by them, when the angle is constructed at
the center of a circle.
11. Similar segments of circles are those accepting
equal angles, or in which the angles are equal to one another.
aþ. Proposition 1
Τοῦ δοθέντος κύκλου τὸ κέντρον εὑρεῖν. To find the center of a given circle.
῎Εστω ὁ δοθεὶς κύκλος ὁ ΑΒΓ· δεῖ δὴ τοῦ ΑΒΓ κύκλου Let ABC be the given circle. So it is required to find
τὸ κέντρον εὑρεῖν. the center of circle ABC.
Διήχθω τις εἰς αὐτόν, ὡς ἔτυχεν, εὐθεῖα ἡ ΑΒ, καὶ Let some straight-line AB have been drawn through
τετμήσθω δίχα κατὰ τὸ Δ σημεῖον, καὶ ἀπὸ τοῦ Δ τῇ ΑΒ (ABC), at random, and let (AB) have been cut in half at
πρὸς ὀρθὰς ἤχθω ἡ ΔΓ καὶ διήχθω ἐπὶ τὸ Ε, καὶ τετμήσθω point D [Prop. 1.9]. And let DC have been drawn from
ἡ ΓΕ δίχα κατὰ τὸ Ζ· λέγω, ὅτι τὸ Ζ κέντρον ἐστὶ τοῦ ΑΒΓ D, at right-angles to AB [Prop. 1.11]. And let (CD) have
[κύκλου]. been drawn through to E. And let CE have been cut in
Μὴ γάρ, ἀλλ᾿ εἰ δυνατόν, ἔστω τὸ Η, καὶ ἐπεζεύχθωσαν half at F [Prop. 1.9]. I say that (point) F is the center of
αἱ ΗΑ, ΗΔ, ΗΒ. καὶ ἐπεὶ ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ΑΔ τῇ ΔΒ, κοινὴ δὲ ἡ the [circle] ABC.
ΔΗ, δύο δὴ αἱ ΑΔ, ΔΗ δύο ταῖς ΗΔ, ΔΒ ἴσαι εἰσὶν ἑκατέρα For (if) not then, if possible, let G (be the center of the
ἑκατέρᾳ· καὶ βάσις ἡ ΗΑ βάσει τῇ ΗΒ ἐστιν ἴση· ἐκ κέντρου circle), and let GA, GD, and GB have been joined. And
γάρ· γωνία ἄρα ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΔΗ γωνίᾳ τῇ ὑπὸ ΗΔΒ ἴση ἐστίν. since AD is equal to DB, and DG (is) common, the two
70
STOIQEIWN gþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 3
ὅταν δὲ εὐθεῖα ἐπ᾿ εὐθεῖαν σταθεῖσα τὰς ἐφεξῆς γωνίας (straight-lines) AD, DG are equal to the two (straightἴσας ἀλλήλαις ποιῇ, ὀρθὴ ἑκατέρα τῶν ἴσων γωνιῶν ἐστιν· lines) BD, DG,
†
respectively. And the base GA is equal
ὀρθὴ ἄρα ἐστὶν ἡ ὑπὸ ΗΔΒ. ἐστὶ δὲ καὶ ἡ ὑπὸ ΖΔΒ ὀρθή· to the base GB. For (they are both) radii. Thus, angle
ἴση ἄρα ἡ ὑπὸ ΖΔΒ τῇ ὑπὸ ΗΔΒ, ἡ μείζων τῇ ἐλάττονι· ADG is equal to angle GDB [Prop. 1.8]. And when a
ὅπερ ἐστὶν ἀδύνατον. οὐκ ἄρα τὸ Η κέντρον ἐστὶ τοῦ ΑΒΓ straight-line stood upon (another) straight-line make adκύκλου. ὁμοίως δὴ δείξομεν, ὅτι οὐδ᾿ ἄλλο τι πλὴν τοῦ Ζ. jacent angles (which are) equal to one another, each of
the equal angles is a right-angle [Def. 1.10]. Thus, GDB
is a right-angle. And FDB is also a right-angle. Thus,
FDB (is) equal to GDB, the greater to the lesser. The
very thing is impossible. Thus, (point) G is not the center
of the circle ABC. So, similarly, we can show that neither
is any other (point) except F.
∆
Β
Η
Ζ
Γ
Ε
Α D
A
G
B
F
C
E
Τὸ Ζ ἄρα σημεῖον κέντρον ἐστὶ τοῦ ΑΒΓ [κύκλου]. Thus, point F is the center of the [circle] ABC.
Pìrisma. Corollary
᾿Εκ δὴ τούτου φανερόν, ὅτι ἐὰν ἐν κύκλῳ εὐθεῖά τις So, from this, (it is) manifest that if any straight-line
εὐθεῖάν τινα δίχα καὶ πρὸς ὀρθὰς τέμνῃ, ἐπὶ τῆς τεμνούσης in a circle cuts any (other) straight-line in half, and at
ἐστὶ τὸ κέντρον τοῦ κύκλου. — ὅπερ ἔδει ποιῆσαι. right-angles, then the center of the circle is on the former (straight-line). — (Which is) the very thing it was
required to do.
† The Greek text has “GD, DB”, which is obviously a mistake.
bþ. Proposition 2
᾿Εὰν κύκλου ἐπὶ τῆς περιφερείας ληφθῇ δύο τυχόντα If two points are taken at random on the circumferσημεῖα, ἡ ἐπὶ τὰ σημεῖα ἐπιζευγνυμένη εὐθεῖα ἐντὸς πεσεῖται ence of a circle then the straight-line joining the points
τοῦ κύκλου. will fall inside the circle.
῎Εστω κύκλος ὁ ΑΒΓ, καὶ ἐπὶ τῆς περιφερείας αὐτοῦ Let ABC be a circle, and let two points A and B have
εἰλήφθω δύο τυχόντα σημεῖα τὰ Α, Β· λέγω, ὅτι ἡ ἀπὸ been taken at random on its circumference. I say that the
τοῦ Α ἐπὶ τὸ Β ἐπιζευγνυμένη εὐθεῖα ἐντὸς πεσεῖται τοῦ straight-line joining A to B will fall inside the circle.
κύκλου. For (if) not then, if possible, let it fall outside (the
Μὴ γάρ, ἀλλ᾿ εἰ δυνατόν, πιπτέτω ἐκτὸς ὡς ἡ ΑΕΒ, καὶ circle), like AEB (in the figure). And let the center of
εἰλήφθω τὸ κέντρον τοῦ ΑΒΓ κύκλου, καὶ ἔστω τὸ Δ, καὶ the circle ABC have been found [Prop. 3.1], and let it be
ἐπεζεύχθωσαν αἱ ΔΑ, ΔΒ, καὶ διήχθω ἡ ΔΖΕ. (at point) D. And let DA and DB have been joined, and
᾿Επεὶ οὖν ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ΔΑ τῇ ΔΒ, ἴση ἄρα καὶ γωνία ἡ let DFE have been drawn through.
ὑπὸ ΔΑΕ τῇ ὑπὸ ΔΒΕ· καὶ ἐπεὶ τριγώνου τοῦ ΔΑΕ μία Therefore, since DA is equal to DB, the angle DAE
71
STOIQEIWN gþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 3
πλευρὰ προσεκβέβληται ἡ ΑΕΒ, μείζων ἄρα ἡ ὑπὸ ΔΕΒ (is) thus also equal to DBE [Prop. 1.5]. And since in triγωνία τῆς ὑπὸ ΔΑΕ. ἴση δὲ ἡ ὑπὸ ΔΑΕ τῇ ὑπὸ ΔΒΕ· angle DAE the one side, AEB, has been produced, anμείζων ἄρα ἡ ὑπὸ ΔΕΒ τῆς ὑπὸ ΔΒΕ. ὑπὸ δὲ τὴν μείζονα gle DEB (is) thus greater than DAE [Prop. 1.16]. And
γωνίαν ἡ μείζων πλευρὰ ὑποτείνει· μείζων ἄρα ἡ ΔΒ τῆς DAE (is) equal to DBE [Prop. 1.5]. Thus, DEB (is)
ΔΕ. ἴση δὲ ἡ ΔΒ τῇ ΔΖ. μείζων ἄρα ἡ ΔΖ τῆς ΔΕ ἡ greater than DBE. And the greater angle is subtended
ἐλάττων τῆς μείζονος· ὅπερ ἐστὶν ἀδύνατον. οὐκ ἄρα ἡ by the greater side [Prop. 1.19]. Thus, DB (is) greater
ἀπὸ τοῦ Α ἐπὶ τὸ Β ἐπιζευγνυμένη εὐθεῖα ἐκτὸς πεσεῖται than DE. And DB (is) equal to DF. Thus, DF (is)
τοῦ κύκλου. ὁμοίως δὴ δείξομεν, ὅτι οὐδὲ ἐπ᾿ αὐτῆς τῆς greater than DE, the lesser than the greater. The very
περιφερείας· ἐντὸς ἄρα. thing is impossible. Thus, the straight-line joining A to
B will not fall outside the circle. So, similarly, we can
show that neither (will it fall) on the circumference itself.
Thus, (it will fall) inside (the circle).
Ζ
∆
Γ
Α
Β
Ε B
D
C
E
F
A
᾿Εὰν ἄρα κύκλου ἐπὶ τῆς περιφερείας ληφθῇ δύο τυχόντα Thus, if two points are taken at random on the cirσημεῖα, ἡ ἐπὶ τὰ σημεῖα ἐπιζευγνυμένη εὐθεῖα ἐντὸς πεσεῖται cumference of a circle then the straight-line joining the
τοῦ κύκλου· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. points will fall inside the circle. (Which is) the very thing
it was required to show.
gþ. Proposition 3
᾿Εὰν ἐν κύκλῳ εὐθεῖά τις διὰ τοῦ κέντρου εὐθεῖάν τινα In a circle, if any straight-line through the center cuts
μὴ διὰ τοῦ κέντρου δίχα τέμνῃ, καὶ πρὸς ὀρθὰς αὐτὴν τέμνει· in half any straight-line not through the center then it
καὶ ἐὰν πρὸς ὀρθὰς αὐτὴν τέμνῃ, καὶ δίχα αὐτὴν τέμνει. also cuts it at right-angles. And (conversely) if it cuts it
῎Εστω κύκλος ὁ ΑΒΓ, καὶ ἐν αὐτῷ εὐθεῖά τις διὰ τοῦ at right-angles then it also cuts it in half.
κέντρου ἡ ΓΔ εὐθεῖάν τινα μὴ διὰ τοῦ κέντρου τὴν ΑΒ δίχα Let ABC be a circle, and, within it, let some straightτεμνέτω κατὰ τὸ Ζ σημεῖον· λέγω, ὅτι καὶ πρὸς ὀρθὰς αὐτὴν line through the center, CD, cut in half some straight-line
τέμνει. not through the center, AB, at the point F. I say that
Εἰλήφθω γὰρ τὸ κέντρον τοῦ ΑΒΓ κύκλου, καὶ ἔστω (CD) also cuts (AB) at right-angles.
τὸ Ε, καὶ ἐπεζεύχθωσαν αἱ ΕΑ, ΕΒ. For let the center of the circle ABC have been found
Καὶ ἐπεὶ ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ΑΖ τῇ ΖΒ, κοινὴ δὲ ἡ ΖΕ, δύο δυσὶν [Prop. 3.1], and let it be (at point) E, and let EA and
ἴσαι [εἰσίν]· καὶ βάσις ἡ ΕΑ βάσει τῇ ΕΒ ἴση· γωνία ἄρα ἡ EB have been joined.
ὑπὸ ΑΖΕ γωνίᾳ τῇ ὑπὸ ΒΖΕ ἴση ἐστίν. ὅταν δὲ εὐθεῖα ἐπ᾿ And since AF is equal to FB, and FE (is) common,
εὐθεῖαν σταθεῖσα τὰς ἐφεξῆς γωνίας ἴσας ἀλλήλαις ποιῇ, two (sides of triangle AFE) [are] equal to two (sides of
ὀρθὴ ἑκατέρα τῶν ἴσων γωνιῶν ἐστιν· ἑκατέρα ἄρα τῶν triangle BFE). And the base EA (is) equal to the base
ὑπὸ ΑΖΕ, ΒΖΕ ὀρθή ἐστιν. ἡ ΓΔ ἄρα διὰ τοῦ κέντρου EB. Thus, angle AFE is equal to angle BFE [Prop. 1.8].
οὖσα τὴν ΑΒ μὴ διὰ τοῦ κέντρου οὖσαν δίχα τέμνουσα καὶ And when a straight-line stood upon (another) straightπρὸς ὀρθὰς τέμνει. line makes adjacent angles (which are) equal to one another, each of the equal angles is a right-angle [Def. 1.10].
Thus, AFE and BFE are each right-angles. Thus, the
72
STOIQEIWN gþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 3
(straight-line) CD, which is through the center and cuts
in half the (straight-line) AB, which is not through the
center, also cuts (AB) at right-angles.
Α Β
Ε
Ζ
Γ
∆ D
A
E
F
B
C
᾿Αλλὰ δὴ ἡ ΓΔ τὴν ΑΒ πρὸς ὀρθὰς τεμνέτω· λέγω, ὅτι And so let CD cut AB at right-angles. I say that it
καὶ δίχα αὐτὴν τέμνει, τουτέστιν, ὅτι ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ΑΖ τῇ ΖΒ. also cuts (AB) in half. That is to say, that AF is equal to
Τῶν γὰρ αὐτῶν κατασκευασθέντων, ἐπεὶ ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ FB.
ΕΑ τῇ ΕΒ, ἴση ἐστὶ καὶ γωνία ἡ ὑπὸ ΕΑΖ τῇ ὑπὸ ΕΒΖ. For, with the same construction, since EA is equal
ἐστὶ δὲ καὶ ὀρθὴ ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΖΕ ὀρθῇ τῇ ὑπὸ ΒΖΕ ἴση· δύο to EB, angle EAF is also equal to EBF [Prop. 1.5].
ἄρα τρίγωνά ἐστι ΕΑΖ, ΕΖΒ τὰς δύο γωνίας δυσὶ γωνίαις And the right-angle AFE is also equal to the right-angle
ἴσας ἔχοντα καὶ μίαν πλευρὰν μιᾷ πλευρᾷ ἴσην κοινὴν αὐτῶν BFE. Thus, EAF and EFB are two triangles having
τὴν ΕΖ ὑποτείνουσαν ὑπὸ μίαν τῶν ἴσων γωνιῶν· καὶ τὰς two angles equal to two angles, and one side equal to
λοιπὰς ἄρα πλευρὰς ταῖς λοιπαῖς πλευραῖς ἴσας ἕξει· ἴση ἄρα one side—(namely), their common (side) EF, subtendἡ ΑΖ τῇ ΖΒ. ing one of the equal angles. Thus, they will also have the
᾿Εὰν ἄρα ἐν κύκλῳ εὐθεῖά τις διὰ τοῦ κέντρου εὐθεῖάν remaining sides equal to the (corresponding) remaining
τινα μὴ διὰ τοῦ κέντρου δίχα τέμνῃ, καὶ πρὸς ὀρθὰς αὐτὴν sides [Prop. 1.26]. Thus, AF (is) equal to FB.
τέμνει· καὶ ἐὰν πρὸς ὀρθὰς αὐτὴν τέμνῃ, καὶ δίχα αὐτὴν Thus, in a circle, if any straight-line through the cenτέμνει· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. ter cuts in half any straight-line not through the center
then it also cuts it at right-angles. And (conversely) if it
cuts it at right-angles then it also cuts it in half. (Which
is) the very thing it was required to show.
dþ. Proposition 4
᾿Εὰν ἐν κύκλῳ δύο εὐθεῖαι τέμνωσιν ἀλλήλας μὴ δὶα τοῦ In a circle, if two straight-lines, which are not through
κέντρου οὖσαι, οὐ τέμνουσιν ἀλλήλας δίχα. the center, cut one another then they do not cut one an-
῎Εστω κύκλος ὁ ΑΒΓΔ, καὶ ἐν αὐτῷ δύο εὐθεῖαι αἱ ΑΓ, other in half.
ΒΔ τεμνέτωσαν ἀλλήλας κατὰ τὸ Ε μὴ διὰ τοῦ κέντρου Let ABCD be a circle, and within it, let two straightοὖσαι· λέγω, ὅτι οὐ τέμνουσιν ἀλλήλας δίχα. lines, AC and BD, which are not through the center, cut
Εἰ γὰρ δυνατόν, τεμνέτωσαν ἀλλήλας δίχα ὥστε ἴσην one another at (point) E. I say that they do not cut one
εἶναι τὴν μὲν ΑΕ τῇ ΕΓ, τὴν δὲ ΒΕ τῇ ΕΔ· καὶ εἰλήφθω τὸ another in half.
κέντρον τοῦ ΑΒΓΔ κύκλου, καὶ ἔστω τὸ Ζ, καὶ ἐπεζεύχθω For, if possible, let them cut one another in half, such
ἡ ΖΕ. that AE is equal to EC, and BE to ED. And let the
᾿Επεὶ οὖν εὐθεῖά τις διὰ τοῦ κέντρου ἡ ΖΕ εὐθεῖάν τινα center of the circle ABCD have been found [Prop. 3.1],
μὴ διὰ τοῦ κέντρου τὴν ΑΓ δίχα τέμνει, καὶ πρὸς ὀρθὰς and let it be (at point) F, and let FE have been joined.
αὐτὴν τέμνει· ὀρθὴ ἄρα ἐστὶν ἡ ὑπὸ ΖΕΑ· πάλιν, ἐπεὶ εὐθεῖά Therefore, since some straight-line through the center,
τις ἡ ΖΕ εὐθεῖάν τινα τὴν ΒΔ δίχα τέμνει, καὶ πρὸς ὀρθὰς FE, cuts in half some straight-line not through the cenαὐτὴν τέμνει· ὀρθὴ ἄρα ἡ ὑπὸ ΖΕΒ. ἐδείχθη δὲ καὶ ἡ ὑπὸ ter, AC, it also cuts it at right-angles [Prop. 3.3]. Thus,
ΖΕΑ ὀρθή· ἴση ἄρα ἡ ὑπὸ ΖΕΑ τῇ ὑπὸ ΖΕΒ ἡ ἐλάττων τῇ FEA is a right-angle. Again, since some straight-line FE
73
STOIQEIWN gþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 3
μείζονι· ὅπερ ἐστὶν ἀδύνατον. οὐκ ἄρα αἱ ΑΓ, ΒΔ τέμνουσιν cuts in half some straight-line BD, it also cuts it at rightἀλλήλας δίχα. angles [Prop. 3.3]. Thus, FEB (is) a right-angle. But
FEA was also shown (to be) a right-angle. Thus, FEA
(is) equal to FEB, the lesser to the greater. The very
thing is impossible. Thus, AC and BD do not cut one
another in half.
Ε
∆
Β
Α Ζ
Γ
E
F
C
B
D
A
᾿Εὰν ἄρα ἐν κύκλῳ δύο εὐθεῖαι τέμνωσιν ἀλλήλας μὴ δὶα Thus, in a circle, if two straight-lines, which are not
τοῦ κέντρου οὖσαι, οὐ τέμνουσιν ἀλλήλας δίχα· ὅπερ ἔδει through the center, cut one another then they do not cut
δεῖξαι. one another in half. (Which is) the very thing it was required to show.
eþ. Proposition 5
᾿Εὰν δύο κύκλοι τέμνωσιν ἀλλήλους, οὐκ ἔσται αὐτῶν If two circles cut one another then they will not have
τὸ αὐτὸ κέντρον. the same center.
Α
Η
Γ
∆
Β Ζ
Ε
D
A C
E
F
G
B
Δύο γὰρ κύκλοι οἱ ΑΒΓ, ΓΔΗ τεμνέτωσαν ἀλλήλους For let the two circles ABC and CDG cut one another
κατὰ τὰ Β, Γ σημεῖα. λέγω, ὅτι οὐκ ἔσται αὐτῶν τὸ αὐτὸ at points B and C. I say that they will not have the same
κέντρον. center.
Εἰ γὰρ δυνατόν, ἔστω τὸ Ε, καὶ ἐπεζεύχθω ἡ ΕΓ, καὶ For, if possible, let E be (the common center), and
διήχθω ἡ ΕΖΗ, ὡς ἔτυχεν. καὶ ἐπεὶ τὸ Ε σημεῖον κέντρον let EC have been joined, and let EFG have been drawn
ἐστὶ τοῦ ΑΒΓ κύκλου, ἵση ἐστὶν ἡ ΕΓ τῇ ΕΖ. πάλιν, ἐπεὶ τὸ through (the two circles), at random. And since point
Ε σημεῖον κέντρον ἐστὶ τοῦ ΓΔΗ κύκλου, ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ΕΓ E is the center of the circle ABC, EC is equal to EF.
τῇ ΕΗ· ἐδείχθη δὲ ἡ ΕΓ καὶ τῇ ΕΖ ἴση· καὶ ἡ ΕΖ ἄρα τῇ ΕΗ Again, since point E is the center of the circle CDG, EC
ἐστιν ἴση ἡ ἐλάσσων τῇ μείζονι· ὅπερ ἐστὶν ἀδύνατον. οὐκ is equal to EG. But EC was also shown (to be) equal
ἄρα τὸ Ε σημεῖον κέντρον ἐστὶ τῶν ΑΒΓ, ΓΔΗ κύκλων. to EF. Thus, EF is also equal to EG, the lesser to the
᾿Εὰν ἄρα δύο κύκλοι τέμνωσιν ἀλλήλους, οὐκ ἔστιν greater. The very thing is impossible. Thus, point E is not
74
STOIQEIWN gþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 3
αὐτῶν τὸ αὐτὸ κέντρον· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. the (common) center of the circles ABC and CDG.
Thus, if two circles cut one another then they will not
have the same center. (Which is) the very thing it was
required to show.
þ. Proposition 6
᾿Εὰν δύο κύκλοι ἐφάπτωνται ἀλλήλων, οὐκ ἔσται αὐτῶν If two circles touch one another then they will not
τὸ αὐτὸ κέντρον. have the same center.
Ε
Α
∆
Ζ
Β
Γ C
A
D
B
F
E
Δύο γὰρ κύκλοι οἱ ΑΒΓ, ΓΔΕ ἐφαπτέσθωσαν ἀλλήλων For let the two circles ABC and CDE touch one anκατὰ τὸ Γ σημεῖον· λέγω, ὅτι οὐκ ἔσται αὐτῶν τὸ αὐτὸ other at point C. I say that they will not have the same
κέντρον. center.
Εἰ γὰρ δυνατόν, ἔστω τὸ Ζ, καὶ ἐπεζεύχθω ἡ ΖΓ, καὶ For, if possible, let F be (the common center), and
διήχθω, ὡς ἔτυχεν, ἡ ΖΕΒ. let FC have been joined, and let FEB have been drawn
᾿Επεὶ οὖν τὸ Ζ σημεῖον κέντρον ἐστὶ τοῦ ΑΒΓ κύκλου, through (the two circles), at random.
ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ΖΓ τῇ ΖΒ. πάλιν, ἐπεὶ τὸ Ζ σημεῖον κέντρον Therefore, since point F is the center of the circle
ἐστὶ τοῦ ΓΔΕ κύκλου, ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ΖΓ τῇ ΖΕ. ἐδείχθη δὲ ἡ ABC, FC is equal to FB. Again, since point F is the
ΖΓ τῇ ΖΒ ἴση· καὶ ἡ ΖΕ ἄρα τῇ ΖΒ ἐστιν ἴση, ἡ ἐλάττων center of the circle CDE, FC is equal to FE. But FC
τῇ μείζονι· ὅπερ ἐστὶν ἀδύνατον. οὐκ ἄρα τὸ Ζ σημεῖον was shown (to be) equal to FB. Thus, FE is also equal
κέντρον ἐστὶ τῶν ΑΒΓ, ΓΔΕ κύκλων. to FB, the lesser to the greater. The very thing is impos-
᾿Εὰν ἄρα δύο κύκλοι ἐφάπτωνται ἀλλήλων, οὐκ ἔσται sible. Thus, point F is not the (common) center of the
αὐτῶν τὸ αὐτὸ κέντρον· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. circles ABC and CDE.
Thus, if two circles touch one another then they will
not have the same center. (Which is) the very thing it was
required to show.
zþ. Proposition 7
᾿Εὰν κύκλου ἐπὶ τῆς διαμέτρου ληφθῇ τι σημεῖον, ὃ μή If some point, which is not the center of the circle,
ἐστι κέντρον τοῦ κύκλου, ἀπὸ δὲ τοῦ σημείου πρὸς τὸν is taken on the diameter of a circle, and some straightκύκλον προσπίπτωσιν εὐθεῖαί τινες, μεγίστη μὲν ἔσται, ἐφ᾿ lines radiate from the point towards the (circumference
ἧς τὸ κέντρον, ἐλαχίστη δὲ ἡ λοιπή, τῶν δὲ ἄλλων ἀεὶ ἡ of the) circle, then the greatest (straight-line) will be that
ἔγγιον τῆς δὶα τοῦ κέντρου τῆς ἀπώτερον μείζων ἐστίν, on which the center (lies), and the least the remainder
δύο δὲ μόνον ἴσαι ἀπὸ τοῦ σημείου προσπεσοῦνται πρὸς (of the same diameter). And for the others, a (straightτὸν κύκλον ἐφ᾿ ἑκάτερα τῆς ἐλαχίστης. line) nearer†
to the (straight-line) through the center is
always greater than a (straight-line) further away. And
only two equal (straight-lines) will radiate from the point
towards the (circumference of the) circle, (one) on each
75
STOIQEIWN gþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 3
(side) of the least (straight-line).
Ε
Γ Η
Ζ ∆
Κ
Θ
Α
Β
H
A
B
G
F D
E
C
K
῎Εστω κύκλος ὁ ΑΒΓΔ, διάμετρος δὲ αὐτοῦ ἔστω ἡ ΑΔ, Let ABCD be a circle, and let AD be its diameter, and
καὶ ἐπὶ τῆς ΑΔ εἰλήφθω τι σημεῖον τὸ Ζ, ὃ μή ἐστι κέντρον let some point F, which is not the center of the circle,
τοῦ κύκλου, κέντρον δὲ τοῦ κύκλου ἔστω τὸ Ε, καὶ ἀπὸ τοῦ have been taken on AD. Let E be the center of the circle.
Ζ πρὸς τὸν ΑΒΓΔ κύκλον προσπιπτέτωσαν εὐθεῖαί τινες αἱ And let some straight-lines, FB, FC, and FG, radiate
ΖΒ, ΖΓ, ΖΗ· λέγω, ὅτι μεγίστη μέν ἐστιν ἡ ΖΑ, ἐλαχίστη from F towards (the circumference of) circle ABCD. I
δὲ ἡ ΖΔ, τῶν δὲ ἄλλων ἡ μὲν ΖΒ τῆς ΖΓ μείζων, ἡ δὲ ΖΓ say that FA is the greatest (straight-line), FD the least,
τῆς ΖΗ. and of the others, FB (is) greater than FC, and FC than
᾿Επεζεύχθωσαν γὰρ αἱ ΒΕ, ΓΕ, ΗΕ. καὶ ἐπεὶ παντὸς FG.
τριγώνου αἱ δύο πλευραὶ τῆς λοιπῆς μείζονές εἰσιν, αἱ ἄρα For let BE, CE, and GE have been joined. And since
ΕΒ, ΕΖ τῆς ΒΖ μείζονές εἰσιν. ἴση δὲ ἡ ΑΕ τῇ ΒΕ [αἱ ἄρα for every triangle (any) two sides are greater than the
ΒΕ, ΕΖ ἴσαι εἰσὶ τῇ ΑΖ]· μείζων ἄρα ἡ ΑΖ τῆς ΒΖ. πάλιν, remaining (side) [Prop. 1.20], EB and EF is thus greater
ἐπεὶ ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ΒΕ τῇ ΓΕ, κοινὴ δὲ ἡ ΖΕ, δύο δὴ αἱ ΒΕ, than BF. And AE (is) equal to BE [thus, BE and EF
ΕΖ δυσὶ ταῖς ΓΕ, ΕΖ ἴσαι εἰσίν. ἀλλὰ καὶ γωνία ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΕΖ is equal to AF]. Thus, AF (is) greater than BF. Again,
γωνίας τῆς ὑπὸ ΓΕΖ μείζων· βάσις ἄρα ἡ ΒΖ βάσεως τῆς since BE is equal to CE, and FE (is) common, the two
ΓΖ μείζων ἐστίν. διὰ τὰ αὐτὰ δὴ καὶ ἡ ΓΖ τῆς ΖΗ μείζων (straight-lines) BE, EF are equal to the two (straightἐστίν. lines) CE, EF (respectively). But, angle BEF (is) also
Πάλιν, ἐπεὶ αἱ ΗΖ, ΖΕ τῆς ΕΗ μείζονές εἰσιν, ἴση δὲ ἡ greater than angle CEF.
‡ Thus, the base BF is greater
ΕΗ τῇ ΕΔ, αἱ ἄρα ΗΖ, ΖΕ τῆς ΕΔ μείζονές εἰσιν. κοινὴ than the base CF. Thus, the base BF is greater than the
ἀφῃρήσθω ἡ ΕΖ· λοιπὴ ἄρα ἡ ΗΖ λοιπῆς τῆς ΖΔ μείζων base CF [Prop. 1.24]. So, for the same (reasons), CF is
ἐστίν. μεγίστη μὲν ἄρα ἡ ΖΑ, ἐλαχίστη δὲ ἡ ΖΔ, μείζων δὲ also greater than FG.
ἡ μὲν ΖΒ τῆς ΖΓ, ἡ δὲ ΖΓ τῆς ΖΗ. Again, since GF and FE are greater than EG
Λέγω, ὅτι καὶ ἀπὸ τοῦ Ζ σημείου δύο μόνον ἴσαι προ- [Prop. 1.20], and EG (is) equal to ED, GF and FE
σπεσοῦνται πρὸς τὸν ΑΒΓΔ κύκλον ἐφ᾿ ἑκάτερα τῆς ΖΔ are thus greater than ED. Let EF have been taken from
ἐλαχίστης. συνεστάτω γὰρ πρὸς τῇ ΕΖ εὐθείᾳ καὶ τῷ πρὸς both. Thus, the remainder GF is greater than the reαὐτῇ σημείῳ τῷ Ε τῇ ὑπὸ ΗΕΖ γωνίᾳ ἴση ἡ ὑπὸ ΖΕΘ, καὶ mainder FD. Thus, FA (is) the greatest (straight-line),
ἐπεζεύχθω ἡ ΖΘ. ἐπεὶ οὖν ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ΗΕ τῇ ΕΘ, κοινὴ FD the least, and FB (is) greater than FC, and FC than
δὲ ἡ ΕΖ, δύο δὴ αἱ ΗΕ, ΕΖ δυσὶ ταῖς ΘΕ, ΕΖ ἴσαι εἰσίν· FG.
καὶ γωνία ἡ ὑπὸ ΗΕΖ γωνίᾳ τῇ ὑπὸ ΘΕΖ ἴση· βάσις ἄρα I also say that from point F only two equal (straightἡ ΖΗ βάσει τῇ ΖΘ ἴση ἐστίν. λέγω δή, ὅτι τῇ ΖΗ ἄλλη lines) will radiate towards (the circumference of) circle
ἴση οὐ προσπεσεῖται πρὸς τὸν κύκλον ἀπὸ τοῦ Ζ σημείου. ABCD, (one) on each (side) of the least (straight-line)
εἰ γὰρ δυνατόν, προσπιπτέτω ἡ ΖΚ. καὶ ἐπεὶ ἡ ΖΚ τῇ ΖΗ FD. For let the (angle) FEH, equal to angle GEF, have
ἴση ἐστίν, ἀλλὰ ἡ ΖΘ τῇ ΖΗ [ἴση ἐστίν], καὶ ἡ ΖΚ ἄρα τῇ been constructed on the straight-line EF, at the point E
ΖΘ ἐστιν ἴση, ἡ ἔγγιον τῆς διὰ τοῦ κέντρου τῇ ἀπώτερον on it [Prop. 1.23], and let FH have been joined. Thereἴση· ὅπερ ἀδύνατον. οὐκ ἄρα ἀπὸ τοῦ Ζ σημείου ἑτέρα τις fore, since GE is equal to EH, and EF (is) common,
76
STOIQEIWN gþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 3
προσπεσεῖται πρὸς τὸν κύκλον ἴση τῇ ΗΖ· μία ἄρα μόνη. the two (straight-lines) GE, EF are equal to the two
᾿Εὰν ἄρα κύκλου ἐπὶ τῆς διαμέτρου ληφθῇ τι σημεῖον, (straight-lines) HE, EF (respectively). And angle GEF
ὃ μή ἐστι κέντρον τοῦ κύκλου, ἀπὸ δὲ τοῦ σημείου πρὸς (is) equal to angle HEF. Thus, the base FG is equal to
τὸν κύκλον προσπίπτωσιν εὐθεῖαί τινες, μεγίστη μὲν ἔσται, the base FH [Prop. 1.4]. So I say that another (straightἐφ᾿ ἧς τὸ κέντρον, ἐλαχίστη δὲ ἡ λοιπή, τῶν δὲ ἄλλων ἀεὶ ἡ line) equal to FG will not radiate towards (the circumferἔγγιον τῆς δὶα τοῦ κέντρου τῆς ἀπώτερον μείζων ἐστίν, δύο ence of) the circle from point F. For, if possible, let FK
δὲ μόνον ἴσαι ἀπὸ τοῦ αὐτοῦ σημείου προσπεσοῦνται πρὸς (so) radiate. And since FK is equal to FG, but FH [is
τὸν κύκλον ἐφ᾿ ἑκάτερα τῆς ἐλαχίστης· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. equal] to FG, FK is thus also equal to FH, the nearer
to the (straight-line) through the center equal to the further away. The very thing (is) impossible. Thus, another
(straight-line) equal to GF will not radiate from the point
F towards (the circumference of) the circle. Thus, (there
is) only one (such straight-line).
Thus, if some point, which is not the center of the
circle, is taken on the diameter of a circle, and some
straight-lines radiate from the point towards the (circumference of the) circle, then the greatest (straight-line)
will be that on which the center (lies), and the least
the remainder (of the same diameter). And for the others, a (straight-line) nearer to the (straight-line) through
the center is always greater than a (straight-line) further
away. And only two equal (straight-lines) will radiate
from the same point towards the (circumference of the)
circle, (one) on each (side) of the least (straight-line).
(Which is) the very thing it was required to show.
† Presumably, in an angular sense.
‡ This is not proved, except by reference to the figure.
hþ. Proposition 8
᾿Εὰν κύκλου ληφθῇ τι σημεῖον ἐκτός, ἀπὸ δὲ τοῦ If some point is taken outside a circle, and some
σημείου πρὸς τὸν κύκλον διαχθῶσιν εὐθεῖαί τινες, ὧν μία straight-lines are drawn from the point to the (circumμὲν διὰ τοῦ κέντρου, αἱ δὲ λοιπαί, ὡς ἔτυχεν, τῶν μὲν πρὸς ference of the) circle, one of which (passes) through
τὴν κοίλην περιφέρειαν προσπιπτουσῶν εὐθειῶν μεγίστη the center, the remainder (being) random, then for the
μέν ἐστιν ἡ διὰ τοῦ κέντρου, τῶν δὲ ἄλλων ἀεὶ ἡ ἔγγιον τῆς straight-lines radiating towards the concave (part of the)
διὰ τοῦ κέντρου τῆς ἀπώτερον μείζων ἐστίν, τῶν δὲ πρὸς circumference, the greatest is that (passing) through the
τὴν κυρτὴν περιφέρειαν προσπιπτουσῶν εὐθειῶν ἐλαχίστη center. For the others, a (straight-line) nearer†
to the
μέν ἐστιν ἡ μεταξὺ τοῦ τε σημείου καὶ τῆς διαμέτρου, τῶν (straight-line) through the center is always greater than
δὲ ἄλλων ἀεὶ ἡ ἔγγιον τῆς ἐλαχίστης τῆς ἀπώτερόν ἐστιν one further away. For the straight-lines radiating towards
ἐλάττων, δύο δὲ μόνον ἴσαι ἀπὸ τοῦ σημείου προσπεσοῦνται the convex (part of the) circumference, the least is that
πρὸς τὸν κύκλον ἐφ᾿ ἑκάτερα τῆς ἐλαχίστης. between the point and the diameter. For the others, a
῎Εστω κύκλος ὁ ΑΒΓ, καὶ τοῦ ΑΒΓ εἰλήφθω τι σημεῖον (straight-line) nearer to the least (straight-line) is always
ἐκτὸς τὸ Δ, καὶ ἀπ᾿ αὐτοῦ διήχθωσαν εὐθεῖαί τινες αἱ ΔΑ, less than one further away. And only two equal (straightΔΕ, ΔΖ, ΔΓ, ἔστω δὲ ἡ ΔΑ διὰ τοῦ κέντρου. λέγω, lines) will radiate from the point towards the (circumὅτι τῶν μὲν πρὸς τὴν ΑΕΖΓ κοίλην περιφέρειαν προσπι- ference of the) circle, (one) on each (side) of the least
πτουσῶν εὐθειῶν μεγίστη μέν ἐστιν ἡ διὰ τοῦ κέντρου ἡ (straight-line).
ΔΑ, μείζων δὲ ἡ μὲν ΔΕ τῆς ΔΖ ἡ δὲ ΔΖ τῆς ΔΓ, τῶν Let ABC be a circle, and let some point D have been
δὲ πρὸς τὴν ΘΛΚΗ κυρτὴν περιφέρειαν προσπιπτουσῶν taken outside ABC, and from it let some straight-lines,
εὐθειῶν ἐλαχίστη μέν ἐστιν ἡ ΔΗ ἡ μεταξὺ τοῦ σημείου καὶ DA, DE, DF, and DC, have been drawn through (the
τῆς διαμέτρου τῆς ΑΗ, ἀεὶ δὲ ἡ ἔγγιον τῆς ΔΗ ἐλαχίστης circle), and let DA be through the center. I say that for
ἐλάττων ἐστὶ τῆς ἀπώτερον, ἡ μὲν ΔΚ τῆς ΔΛ, ἡ δὲ ΔΛ the straight-lines radiating towards the concave (part of
77
STOIQEIWN gþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 3
τῆς ΔΘ. the) circumference, AEFC, the greatest is the one (passing) through the center, (namely) AD, and (that) DE (is)
greater than DF, and DF than DC. For the straight-lines
radiating towards the convex (part of the) circumference,
HLKG, the least is the one between the point and the diameter AG, (namely) DG, and a (straight-line) nearer to
the least (straight-line) DG is always less than one farther away, (so that) DK (is less) than DL, and DL than
than DH.
Ζ
ΛΚΗ
Μ
∆
Θ
Ν
Β
Α
Ε
Γ C
H L K
G
M
A
E
F
B
D
N
Εἰλήφθω γὰρ τὸ κέντρον τοῦ ΑΒΓ κύκλου καὶ ἔστω τὸ For let the center of the circle have been found
Μ· καὶ ἐπεζεύχθωσαν αἱ ΜΕ, ΜΖ, ΜΓ, ΜΚ, ΜΛ, ΜΘ. [Prop. 3.1], and let it be (at point) M [Prop. 3.1]. And let
Καὶ ἐπεὶ ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ΑΜ τῇ ΕΜ, κοινὴ προσκείσθω ἡ ME, MF, MC, MK, ML, and MH have been joined.
ΜΔ· ἡ ἄρα ΑΔ ἴση ἐστὶ ταῖς ΕΜ, ΜΔ. ἀλλ᾿ αἱ ΕΜ, ΜΔ And since AM is equal to EM, let MD have been
τῆς ΕΔ μείζονές εἰσιν· καὶ ἡ ΑΔ ἄρα τῆς ΕΔ μείζων ἐστίν. added to both. Thus, AD is equal to EM and MD. But,
πάλιν, ἐπεὶ ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ΜΕ τῇ ΜΖ, κοινὴ δὲ ἡ ΜΔ, αἱ ΕΜ, EM and MD is greater than ED [Prop. 1.20]. Thus,
ΜΔ ἄρα ταῖς ΖΜ, ΜΔ ἴσαι εἰσίν· καὶ γωνία ἡ ὑπὸ ΕΜΔ AD is also greater than ED. Again, since ME is equal
γωνίας τῆς ὑπὸ ΖΜΔ μείζων ἐστίν. βάσις ἄρα ἡ ΕΔ βάσεως to MF, and MD (is) common, the (straight-lines) EM,
τῆς ΖΔ μείζων ἐστίν· ὁμοίως δὴ δείξομεν, ὅτι καὶ ἡ ΖΔ τῆς MD are thus equal to FM, MD. And angle EMD is
ΓΔ μείζων ἐστίν· μεγίστη μὲν ἄρα ἡ ΔΑ, μείζων δὲ ἡ μὲν greater than angle FMD.
‡ Thus, the base ED is greater
ΔΕ τῆς ΔΖ, ἡ δὲ ΔΖ τῆς ΔΓ. than the base FD [Prop. 1.24]. So, similarly, we can
Καὶ ἐπεὶ αἱ ΜΚ, ΚΔ τῆς ΜΔ μείζονές εἰσιν, ἴση δὲ ἡ show that FD is also greater than CD. Thus, AD (is) the
ΜΗ τῇ ΜΚ, λοιπὴ ἄρα ἡ ΚΔ λοιπῆς τῆς ΗΔ μείζων ἐστίν· greatest (straight-line), and DE (is) greater than DF,
ὥστε ἡ ΗΔ τῆς ΚΔ ἐλάττων ἐστίν· καὶ ἐπεὶ τριγώνου τοῦ and DF than DC.
ΜΛΔ ἐπὶ μιᾶς τῶν πλευρῶν τῆς ΜΔ δύο εὐθεῖαι ἐντὸς And since MK and KD is greater than MD [Prop.
συνεστάθησαν αἱ ΜΚ, ΚΔ, αἱ ἄρα ΜΚ, ΚΔ τῶν ΜΛ, ΛΔ 1.20], and MG (is) equal to MK, the remainder KD
ἐλάττονές εἰσιν· ἴση δὲ ἡ ΜΚ τῇ ΜΛ· λοιπὴ ἄρα ἡ ΔΚ is thus greater than the remainder GD. So GD is less
λοιπῆς τῆς ΔΛ ἐλάττων ἐστίν. ὁμοίως δὴ δείξομεν, ὅτι than KD. And since in triangle MLD, the two interκαὶ ἡ ΔΛ τῆς ΔΘ ἐλάττων ἐστίν· ἐλαχίστη μὲν ἄρα ἡ ΔΗ, nal straight-lines MK and KD were constructed on one
ἐλάττων δὲ ἡ μὲν ΔΚ τῆς ΔΛ ἡ δὲ ΔΛ τῆς ΔΘ. of the sides, MD, then MK and KD are thus less than
Λέγω, ὅτι καὶ δύο μόνον ἴσαι ἀπὸ τοῦ Δ σημείου ML and LD [Prop. 1.21]. And MK (is) equal to ML.
προσπεσοῦνται πρὸς τὸν κύκλον ἐφ᾿ ἑκάτερα τῆς ΔΗ Thus, the remainder DK is less than the remainder DL.
ἐλαχίστης· συνεστάτω πρὸς τῇ ΜΔ εὐθείᾳ καὶ τῷ πρὸς So, similarly, we can show that DL is also less than DH.
αὐτῇ σημείῳ τῷ Μ τῇ ὑπὸ ΚΜΔ γωνίᾳ ἴση γωνία ἡ ὑπὸ Thus, DG (is) the least (straight-line), and DK (is) less
ΔΜΒ, καὶ ἐπεζεύχθω ἡ ΔΒ. καὶ ἐπεὶ ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ΜΚ τῇ than DL, and DL than DH.
ΜΒ, κοινὴ δὲ ἡ ΜΔ, δύο δὴ αἱ ΚΜ, ΜΔ δύο ταῖς ΒΜ, ΜΔ I also say that only two equal (straight-lines) will radi78
STOIQEIWN gþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 3
ἴσαι εἰσὶν ἑκατέρα ἑκατέρᾳ· καὶ γωνία ἡ ὑπὸ ΚΜΔ γωνίᾳ ate from point D towards (the circumference of) the cirτῇ ὑπὸ ΒΜΔ ἴση· βάσις ἄρα ἡ ΔΚ βάσει τῇ ΔΒ ἴση ἐστίν. cle, (one) on each (side) on the least (straight-line), DG.
λέγω [δή], ὅτι τῇ ΔΚ εὐθείᾳ ἄλλη ἴση οὐ προσπεσεῖται Let the angle DMB, equal to angle KMD, have been
πρὸς τὸν κύκλον ἀπὸ τοῦ Δ σημείου. εἰ γὰρ δυνατόν, προ- constructed on the straight-line MD, at the point M on
σπιπτέτω καὶ ἔστω ἡ ΔΝ. ἐπεὶ οὖν ἡ ΔΚ τῇ ΔΝ ἐστιν ἴση, it [Prop. 1.23], and let DB have been joined. And since
ἀλλ᾿ ἡ ΔΚ τῇ ΔΒ ἐστιν ἴση, καὶ ἡ ΔΒ ἄρα τῇ ΔΝ ἐστιν MK is equal to MB, and MD (is) common, the two
ἴση, ἡ ἔγγιον τῆς ΔΗ ἐλαχίστης τῇ ἀπώτερον [ἐστιν] ἴση· (straight-lines) KM, MD are equal to the two (straightὅπερ ἀδύνατον ἐδείχθη. οὐκ ἄρα πλείους ἢ δύο ἴσαι πρὸς lines) BM, MD, respectively. And angle KMD (is)
τὸν ΑΒΓ κύκλον ἀπὸ τοῦ Δ σημείου ἐφ᾿ ἑκάτερα τῆς ΔΗ equal to angle BMD. Thus, the base DK is equal to the
ἐλαχίστης προσπεσοῦνται. base DB [Prop. 1.4]. [So] I say that another (straight-
᾿Εὰν ἄρα κύκλου ληφθῇ τι σημεῖον ἐκτός, ἀπὸ δὲ τοῦ line) equal to DK will not radiate towards the (circumσημείου πρὸς τὸν κύκλον διαχθῶσιν εὐθεῖαί τινες, ὧν μία ference of the) circle from point D. For, if possible, let
μὲν διὰ τοῦ κέντρου αἱ δὲ λοιπαί, ὡς ἔτυχεν, τῶν μὲν πρὸς (such a straight-line) radiate, and let it be DN. Thereτὴν κοίλην περιφέρειαν προσπιπτουσῶν εὐθειῶν μεγίστη fore, since DK is equal to DN, but DK is equal to DB,
μέν ἐστιν ἡ διὰ τοῦ κέντου, τῶν δὲ ἄλλων ἀεὶ ἡ ἔγγιον τῆς then DB is thus also equal to DN, (so that) a (straightδιὰ τοῦ κέντρου τῆς ἀπώτερον μείζων ἐστίν, τῶν δὲ πρὸς line) nearer to the least (straight-line) DG [is] equal to
τὴν κυρτὴν περιφέρειαν προσπιπτουσῶν εὐθειῶν ἐλαχίστη one further away. The very thing was shown (to be) imμέν ἐστιν ἡ μεταξὺ τοῦ τε σημείου καὶ τῆς διαμέτρου, τῶν possible. Thus, not more than two equal (straight-lines)
δὲ ἄλλων ἀεὶ ἡ ἔγγιον τῆς ἐλαχίστης τῆς ἀπώτερόν ἐστιν will radiate towards (the circumference of) circle ABC
ἐλάττων, δύο δὲ μόνον ἴσαι ἀπὸ τοῦ σημείου προσπεσοῦνται from point D, (one) on each side of the least (straightπρὸς τὸν κύκλον ἐφ᾿ ἑκάτερα τῆς ἐλαχίστης· ὅπερ ἔδει line) DG.
δεῖξαι. Thus, if some point is taken outside a circle, and some
straight-lines are drawn from the point to the (circumference of the) circle, one of which (passes) through the center, the remainder (being) random, then for the straightlines radiating towards the concave (part of the) circumference, the greatest is that (passing) through the center.
For the others, a (straight-line) nearer to the (straightline) through the center is always greater than one further away. For the straight-lines radiating towards the
convex (part of the) circumference, the least is that between the point and the diameter. For the others, a
(straight-line) nearer to the least (straight-line) is always
less than one further away. And only two equal (straightlines) will radiate from the point towards the (circumference of the) circle, (one) on each (side) of the least
(straight-line). (Which is) the very thing it was required
to show.
† Presumably, in an angular sense.
‡ This is not proved, except by reference to the figure.
jþ. Proposition 9
᾿Εὰν κύκλου ληφθῇ τι σημεῖον ἐντός, ἀπο δὲ τοῦ If some point is taken inside a circle, and more than
σημείου πρὸς τὸν κύκλον προσπίπτωσι πλείους ἢ δύο ἴσαι two equal straight-lines radiate from the point towards
εὐθεῖαι, τὸ ληφθὲν σημεῖον κέντρον ἐστὶ τοῦ κύκλου. the (circumference of the) circle, then the point taken is
῎Εστω κύκλος ὁ ΑΒΓ, ἐντὸς δὲ αὐτοῦ σημεῖον τὸ Δ, καὶ the center of the circle.
ἀπὸ τοῦ Δ πρὸς τὸν ΑΒΓ κύκλον προσπιπτέτωσαν πλείους Let ABC be a circle, and D a point inside it, and let
ἢ δύο ἴσαι εὐθεῖαι αἱ ΔΑ, ΔΒ, ΔΓ· λέγω, ὅτι τὸ Δ σημεῖον more than two equal straight-lines, DA, DB, and DC, raκέντρον ἐστὶ τοῦ ΑΒΓ κύκλου. diate from D towards (the circumference of) circle ABC.
79
STOIQEIWN gþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 3
I say that point D is the center of circle ABC.
Κ
Ε
Η
Γ
Ζ
Λ
∆
Β
Θ
Α
D
E
B
C
G
A
K
L
F
H
᾿Επεζεύχθωσαν γὰρ αἱ ΑΒ, ΒΓ καὶ τετμήσθωσαν For let AB and BC have been joined, and (then)
δίχα κατὰ τὰ Ε, Ζ σημεῖα, καὶ ἐπιζευχθεῖσαι αἱ ΕΔ, ΖΔ have been cut in half at points E and F (respectively)
διήχθωσαν ἐπὶ τὰ Η, Κ, Θ, Λ σημεῖα. [Prop. 1.10]. And ED and FD being joined, let them
᾿Επεὶ οὖν ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ΑΕ τῇ ΕΒ, κοινὴ δὲ ἡ ΕΔ, δύο have been drawn through to points G, K, H, and L.
δὴ αἱ ΑΕ, ΕΔ δύο ταῖς ΒΕ, ΕΔ ἴσαι εἰσίν· καὶ βάσις ἡ ΔΑ Therefore, since AE is equal to EB, and ED (is) comβάσει τῇ ΔΒ ἴση· γωνία ἄρα ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΕΔ γωνίᾳ τῇ ὑπὸ ΒΕΔ mon, the two (straight-lines) AE, ED are equal to the
ἴση ἐστίν· ὀρθὴ ἄρα ἑκατέρα τῶν ὑπὸ ΑΕΔ, ΒΕΔ γωνιῶν· ἡ two (straight-lines) BE, ED (respectively). And the base
ΗΚ ἄρα τὴν ΑΒ τέμνει δίχα καὶ πρὸς ὀρθάς. καὶ ἐπεί, ἐὰν DA (is) equal to the base DB. Thus, angle AED is equal
ἐν κύκλῳ εὐθεῖά τις εὐθεῖάν τινα δίχα τε καὶ πρὸς ὀρθὰς to angle BED [Prop. 1.8]. Thus, angles AED and BED
τέμνῃ, ἐπὶ τῆς τεμνούσης ἐστὶ τὸ κέντρον τοῦ κύκλου, ἐπὶ (are) each right-angles [Def. 1.10]. Thus, GK cuts AB in
τῆς ΗΚ ἄρα ἐστὶ τὸ κέντρον τοῦ κύκλου. διὰ τὰ αὐτὰ δὴ καὶ half, and at right-angles. And since, if some straight-line
ἐπὶ τῆς ΘΛ ἐστι τὸ κέντρον τοῦ ΑΒΓ κύκλου. καὶ οὐδὲν in a circle cuts some (other) straight-line in half, and at
ἕτερον κοινὸν ἔχουσιν αἱ ΗΚ, ΘΛ εὐθεῖαι ἢ τὸ Δ σημεῖον· right-angles, then the center of the circle is on the former
τὸ Δ ἄρα σημεῖον κέντρον ἐστὶ τοῦ ΑΒΓ κύκλου. (straight-line) [Prop. 3.1 corr.], the center of the circle is
᾿Εὰν ἄρα κύκλου ληφθῇ τι σημεῖον ἐντός, ἀπὸ δὲ τοῦ thus on GK. So, for the same (reasons), the center of
σημείου πρὸς τὸν κύκλον προσπίπτωσι πλείους ἢ δύο ἴσαι circle ABC is also on HL. And the straight-lines GK and
εὐθεῖαι, τὸ ληφθὲν σημεῖον κέντρον ἐστὶ τοῦ κύκλου· ὅπερ HL have no common (point) other than point D. Thus,
ἔδει δεῖξαι. point D is the center of circle ABC.
Thus, if some point is taken inside a circle, and more
than two equal straight-lines radiate from the point towards the (circumference of the) circle, then the point
taken is the center of the circle. (Which is) the very thing
it was required to show.
iþ. Proposition 10
Κύκλος κύκλον οὐ τέμνει κατὰ πλείονα σημεῖα ἢ δύο. A circle does not cut a(nother) circle at more than two
Εἰ γὰρ δυνατόν, κύκλος ὁ ΑΒΓ κύκλον τὸν ΔΕΖ points.
τεμνέτω κατὰ πλείονα σημεῖα ἢ δύο τὰ Β, Η, Ζ, Θ, καὶ For, if possible, let the circle ABC cut the circle DEF
ἐπιζευχθεῖσαι αἱ ΒΘ, ΒΗ δίχα τεμνέσθωσαν κατὰ τὰ Κ, Λ at more than two points, B, G, F, and H. And BH and
σημεῖα· καὶ ἀπὸ τῶν Κ, Λ ταῖς ΒΘ, ΒΗ πρὸς ὀρθὰς ἀχθεῖσαι BG being joined, let them (then) have been cut in half
αἱ ΚΓ, ΛΜ διήχθωσαν ἐπὶ τὰ Α, Ε σημεῖα. at points K and L (respectively). And KC and LM being drawn at right-angles to BH and BG from K and
L (respectively) [Prop. 1.11], let them (then) have been
drawn through to points A and E (respectively).
80
STOIQEIWN gþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 3
∆ Β
Γ
Η
Ξ Ε
Ο
Μ
Θ
Ζ
Α
Λ
Κ
Ν
B
A
C
D
L O E
G
M
P
F
K
N
H
᾿Επεὶ οὖν ἐν κύκλῳ τῷ ΑΒΓ εὐθεῖά τις ἡ ΑΓ εὐθεῖάν Therefore, since in circle ABC some straight-line
τινα τὴν ΒΘ δίχα καὶ πρὸς ὀρθὰς τέμνει, ἐπὶ τῆς ΑΓ ἄρα AC cuts some (other) straight-line BH in half, and at
ἐστὶ τὸ κέντρον τοῦ ΑΒΓ κύκλου. πάλιν, ἐπεὶ ἐν κύκλῳ τῷ right-angles, the center of circle ABC is thus on AC
αὐτῷ τῷ ΑΒΓ εὐθεῖά τις ἡ ΝΞ εὐθεῖάν τινα τὴν ΒΗ δίχα [Prop. 3.1 corr.]. Again, since in the same circle ABC
καὶ πρὸς ὀρθὰς τέμνει, ἐπὶ τῆς ΝΞ ἄρα ἐστὶ τὸ κέντρον some straight-line NO cuts some (other straight-line) BG
τοῦ ΑΒΓ κύκλου. ἐδείχθη δὲ καὶ ἐπὶ τῆς ΑΓ, καὶ κατ᾿ in half, and at right-angles, the center of circle ABC is
οὐδὲν συμβάλλουσιν αἱ ΑΓ, ΝΞ εὐθεῖαι ἢ κατὰ τὸ Ο· τὸ thus on NO [Prop. 3.1 corr.]. And it was also shown (to
Ο ἄρα σημεῖον κέντρον ἐστὶ τοῦ ΑΒΓ κύκλου. ὁμοίως δὴ be) on AC. And the straight-lines AC and NO meet at
δείξομεν, ὅτι καὶ τοῦ ΔΕΖ κύκλου κέντρον ἐστὶ τὸ Ο· δύο no other (point) than P. Thus, point P is the center of
ἄρα κύκλων τεμνόντων ἀλλήλους τῶν ΑΒΓ, ΔΕΖ τὸ αὐτό circle ABC. So, similarly, we can show that P is also the
ἐστι κέντρον τὸ Ο· ὅπερ ἐστὶν ἀδύνατον. center of circle DEF. Thus, two circles cutting one anΟὐκ ἄρα κύκλος κύκλον τέμνει κατὰ πλείονα σημεῖα ἢ other, ABC and DEF, have the same center P. The very
δύο· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. thing is impossible [Prop. 3.5].
Thus, a circle does not cut a(nother) circle at more
than two points. (Which is) the very thing it was required
to show.
iaþ. Proposition 11
᾿Εὰν δύο κύκλοι ἐφάπτωνται ἀλλήλων ἐντός, καὶ ληφθῇ If two circles touch one another internally, and their
αὐτῶν τὰ κέντρα, ἡ ἐπὶ τὰ κέντρα αὐτῶν ἐπιζευγνυμένη centers are found, then the straight-line joining their cenεὐθεῖα καὶ ἐκβαλλομένη ἐπὶ τὴν συναφὴν πεσεῖται τῶν ters, being produced, will fall upon the point of union of
κύκλων. the circles.
Δύο γὰρ κύκλοι οἱ ΑΒΓ, ΑΔΕ ἐφαπτέσθωσαν ἀλλήλων For let two circles, ABC and ADE, touch one another
ἐντὸς κατὰ τὸ Α σημεῖον, καὶ εἰλήφθω τοῦ μὲν ΑΒΓ κύκλου internally at point A, and let the center F of circle ABC
κέντρον τὸ Ζ, τοῦ δὲ ΑΔΕ τὸ Η· λέγω, ὅτι ἡ ἀπὸ τοῦ Η ἐπὶ have been found [Prop. 3.1], and (the center) G of (cirτὸ Ζ ἐπιζευγνυμένη εὐθεῖα ἐκβαλλομένη ἐπὶ τὸ Α πεσεῖται. cle) ADE [Prop. 3.1]. I say that the straight-line joining
Μὴ γάρ, ἀλλ᾿ εἰ δυνατόν, πιπτέτω ὡς ἡ ΖΗΘ, καὶ G to F, being produced, will fall on A.
ἐπεζεύχθωσαν αἱ ΑΖ, ΑΗ. For (if) not then, if possible, let it fall like FGH (in
᾿Επεὶ οὖν αἱ ΑΗ, ΗΖ τῆς ΖΑ, τουτέστι τῆς ΖΘ, μείζονές the figure), and let AF and AG have been joined.
εἰσιν, κοινὴ ἀφῃρήσθω ἡ ΖΗ· λοιπὴ ἄρα ἡ ΑΗ λοιπῆς τῆς Therefore, since AG and GF is greater than FA, that
ΗΘ μείζων ἐστίν. ἴση δὲ ἡ ΑΗ τῇ ΗΔ· καὶ ἡ ΗΔ ἄρα is to say FH [Prop. 1.20], let FG have been taken from
τῆς ΗΘ μείζων ἐστὶν ἡ ἐλάττων τῆς μείζονος· ὅπερ ἐστὶν both. Thus, the remainder AG is greater than the reἀδύνατον· οὐκ ἄρα ἡ ἀπὸ τοῦ Ζ ἐπὶ τὸ Η ἐπιζευγνυμένη mainder GH. And AG (is) equal to GD. Thus, GD is
εὐθεὶα ἐκτὸς πεσεῖται· κατὰ τὸ Α ἄρα ἐπὶ τῆς συναφῆς also greater than GH, the lesser than the greater. The
πεσεῖται. very thing is impossible. Thus, the straight-line joining F
to G will not fall outside (one circle but inside the other).
Thus, it will fall upon the point of union (of the circles)
81
STOIQEIWN gþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 3
at point A.
∆
Β
Η
Ζ
Α
Θ
Ε
Γ
F
A
B
C
G
H
E
D
᾿Εὰν ἄρα δύο κύκλοι ἐφάπτωνται ἀλλήλων ἐντός, [καὶ Thus, if two circles touch one another internally, [and
ληφθῇ αὐτῶν τὰ κέντρα], ἡ ἐπὶ τὰ κέντρα αὐτῶν ἐπιζευ- their centers are found], then the straight-line joining
γνυμένη εὐθεῖα [καὶ ἐκβαλλομένη] ἐπὶ τὴν συναφὴν πεσεῖται their centers, [being produced], will fall upon the point
τῶν κύκλων· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. of union of the circles. (Which is) the very thing it was
required to show.
ibþ. Proposition 12
᾿Εὰν δύο κύκλοι ἐφάπτωνται ἀλλήλων ἐκτός, ἡ ἐπὶ τὰ If two circles touch one another externally then the
κέντρα αὐτῶν ἐπιζευγνυμένη διὰ τῆς ἐπαφῆς ἐλεύσεται. (straight-line) joining their centers will go through the
point of union.
Α
Β
Ε
Η
Ζ
∆
Γ
E
F
B
D
C
A
G
Δύο γὰρ κύκλοι οἱ ΑΒΓ, ΑΔΕ ἐφαπτέσθωσαν ἀλλήλων For let two circles, ABC and ADE, touch one anἐκτὸς κατὰ τὸ Α σημεῖον, καὶ εἰλήφθω τοῦ μὲν ΑΒΓ other externally at point A, and let the center F of ABC
κέντρον τὸ Ζ, τοῦ δὲ ΑΔΕ τὸ Η· λέγω, ὅτι ἡ ἀπὸ τοῦ have been found [Prop. 3.1], and (the center) G of ADE
Ζ ἐπὶ τὸ Η ἐπιζευγνυμένη εὐθεῖα διὰ τῆς κατὰ τὸ Α ἐπαφῆς [Prop. 3.1]. I say that the straight-line joining F to G will
ἐλεύσεται. go through the point of union at A.
Μὴ γάρ, ἀλλ᾿ εἰ δυνατόν, ἐρχέσθω ὡς ἡ ΖΓΔΗ, καὶ For (if) not then, if possible, let it go like FCDG (in
ἐπεζεύχθωσαν αἱ ΑΖ, ΑΗ. the figure), and let AF and AG have been joined.
᾿Επεὶ οὖν τὸ Ζ σημεῖον κέντρον ἐστὶ τοῦ ΑΒΓ κύκλου, Therefore, since point F is the center of circle ABC,
ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ΖΑ τῇ ΖΓ. πάλιν, ἐπεὶ τὸ Η σημεῖον κέντρον FA is equal to FC. Again, since point G is the center of
ἐστὶ τοῦ ΑΔΕ κύκλου, ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ΗΑ τῇ ΗΔ. ἐδείχθη circle ADE, GA is equal to GD. And FA was also shown
82
STOIQEIWN gþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 3
δὲ καὶ ἡ ΖΑ τῇ ΖΓ ἴση· αἱ ἄρα ΖΑ, ΑΗ ταῖς ΖΓ, ΗΔ ἴσαι (to be) equal to FC. Thus, the (straight-lines) FA and
εἰσίν· ὥστε ὅλη ἡ ΖΗ τῶν ΖΑ, ΑΗ μείζων ἐστίν· ἀλλὰ καὶ AG are equal to the (straight-lines) FC and GD. So the
ἐλάττων· ὅπερ ἐστὶν ἀδύνατον. οὐκ ἄρα ἡ ἀπὸ τοῦ Ζ ἐπὶ whole of FG is greater than FA and AG. But, (it is) also
τὸ Η ἐπιζευγνυμένη εὐθεῖα διὰ τῆς κατὰ τὸ Α ἐπαφῆς οὐκ less [Prop. 1.20]. The very thing is impossible. Thus, the
ἐλεύσεται· δι᾿ αὐτῆς ἄρα. straight-line joining F to G cannot not go through the
᾿Εὰν ἄρα δύο κύκλοι ἐφάπτωνται ἀλλήλων ἐκτός, ἡ ἐπὶ point of union at A. Thus, (it will go) through it.
τὰ κέντρα αὐτῶν ἐπιζευγνυμένη [εὐθεῖα] διὰ τῆς ἐπαφῆς Thus, if two circles touch one another externally then
ἐλεύσεται· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. the [straight-line] joining their centers will go through
the point of union. (Which is) the very thing it was required to show.
igþ. Proposition 13
Κύκλος κύκλου οὐκ ἐφάπτεται κατὰ πλείονα σημεῖα ἢ A circle does not touch a(nother) circle at more than
καθ᾿ ἕν, ἐάν τε ἐντὸς ἐάν τε ἐκτὸς ἐφάπτηται. one point, whether they touch internally or externally.
Α
Η Θ
Ζ
Γ
Κ
Ε
Β ∆ D
G H
F
E
A
C
B
K
Εἰ γὰρ δυνατόν, κύκλος ὁ ΑΒΓΔ κύκλου τοῦ ΕΒΖΔ For, if possible, let circle ABDC†
touch circle EBFD—
ἐφαπτέσθω πρότερον ἐντὸς κατὰ πλείονα σημεῖα ἢ ἓν τὰ Δ, first of all, internally—at more than one point, D and B.
Β. And let the center G of circle ABDC have been found
Καὶ εἰλήφθω τοῦ μὲν ΑΒΓΔ κύκλου κέντρον τὸ Η, τοῦ [Prop. 3.1], and (the center) H of EBFD [Prop. 3.1].
δὲ ΕΒΖΔ τὸ Θ. Thus, the (straight-line) joining G and H will fall on
῾Η ἄρα ἀπὸ τοῦ Η ἐπὶ τὸ Θ ἐπιζευγνυμένη ἐπὶ τὰ Β, B and D [Prop. 3.11]. Let it fall like BGHD (in the
Δ πεσεῖται. πιπτέτω ὡς ἡ ΒΗΘΔ. καὶ ἐπεὶ τὸ Η σημεῖον figure). And since point G is the center of circle ABDC,
κέντρον ἐστὶ τοῦ ΑΒΓΔ κύκλου, ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ΒΗ τῇ ΗΔ· BG is equal to GD. Thus, BG (is) greater than HD.
μείζων ἄρα ἡ ΒΗ τῆς ΘΔ· πολλῷ ἄρα μείζων ἡ ΒΘ τῆς ΘΔ. Thus, BH (is) much greater than HD. Again, since point
πάλιν, ἐπεὶ τὸ Θ σημεῖον κέντρον ἐστὶ τοῦ ΕΒΖΔ κύκλου, H is the center of circle EBFD, BH is equal to HD.
ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ΒΘ τῇ ΘΔ· ἐδείχθη δὲ αὐτῆς καὶ πολλῷ μείζων· But it was also shown (to be) much greater than it. The
ὅπερ ἀδύνατον· οὐκ ἄρα κύκλος κύκλου ἐφάπτεται ἐντὸς very thing (is) impossible. Thus, a circle does not touch
κατὰ πλείονα σημεῖα ἢ ἕν. a(nother) circle internally at more than one point.
Λέγω δή, ὅτι οὐδὲ ἐκτός. So, I say that neither (does it touch) externally (at
Εἰ γὰρ δυνατόν, κύκλος ὁ ΑΓΚ κύκλου τοῦ ΑΒΓΔ more than one point).
ἐφαπτέσθω ἐκτὸς κατὰ πλείονα σημεῖα ἢ ἓν τὰ Α, Γ, καὶ For, if possible, let circle ACK touch circle ABDC
ἐπεζεύχθω ἡ ΑΓ. externally at more than one point, A and C. And let AC
῎Επεὶ οὖν κύκλων τῶν ΑΒΓΔ, ΑΓΚ εἴληπται ἐπὶ τῆς have been joined.
περιφερείας ἑκατέρου δύο τυχόντα σημεῖα τὰ Α, Γ, ἡ ἐπὶ Therefore, since two points, A and C, have been taken
τὰ σημεῖα ἐπιζευγνυμένη εὐθεῖα ἐντὸς ἑκατέρου πεσεῖται· at random on the circumference of each of the circles
ἀλλὰ τοῦ μὲν ΑΒΓΔ ἐντὸς ἔπεσεν, τοῦ δὲ ΑΓΚ ἐκτός· ABDC and ACK, the straight-line joining the points will
ὅπερ ἄτοπον· οὐκ ἄρα κύκλος κύκλου ἐφάπτεται ἐκτὸς κατὰ fall inside each (circle) [Prop. 3.2]. But, it fell inside
πλείονα σημεῖα ἢ ἕν. ἐδείχθη δέ, ὅτι οὐδὲ ἐντός. ABDC, and outside ACK [Def. 3.3]. The very thing
83
STOIQEIWN gþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 3
Κύκλος ἄρα κύκλου οὐκ ἐφάπτεται κατὰ πλείονα σημεῖα (is) absurd. Thus, a circle does not touch a(nother) circle
ἢ [καθ᾿] ἕν, ἐάν τε ἐντὸς ἐάν τε ἐκτὸς ἐφάπτηται· ὅπερ ἔδει externally at more than one point. And it was shown that
δεῖξαι. neither (does it) internally.
Thus, a circle does not touch a(nother) circle at more
than one point, whether they touch internally or externally. (Which is) the very thing it was required to show.
† The Greek text has “ABCD”, which is obviously a mistake.
idþ. Proposition 14
᾿Εν κύκλῳ αἱ ἴσαι εὐθεῖαι ἴσον ἀπέχουσιν ἀπὸ τοῦ In a circle, equal straight-lines are equally far from the
κέντρου, καὶ αἱ ἴσον ἀπέχουσαι ἀπὸ τοῦ κέντρου ἴσαι center, and (straight-lines) which are equally far from the
ἀλλήλαις εἰσίν. center are equal to one another.
Ζ
Ε Η
Α
Γ
∆
Β
F
B
D
E G
A
C
῎Εστω κύκλος ὁ ΑΒΓΔ, καὶ ἐν αὐτῷ ἴσαι εὐθεῖαι ἔστω- Let ABDC† be a circle, and let AB and CD be equal
σαν αἱ ΑΒ, ΓΔ· λέγω, ὅτι αἱ ΑΒ, ΓΔ ἴσον ἀπέχουσιν ἀπὸ straight-lines within it. I say that AB and CD are equally
τοῦ κέντρου. far from the center.
Εἰλήφθω γὰρ τὸ κέντον τοῦ ΑΒΓΔ κύκλου καὶ ἔστω τὸ For let the center of circle ABDC have been found
Ε, καὶ ἀπὸ τοῦ Ε ἐπὶ τὰς ΑΒ, ΓΔ κάθετοι ἤχθωσαν αἱ ΕΖ, [Prop. 3.1], and let it be (at) E. And let EF and EG
ΕΗ, καὶ ἐπεζεύχθωσαν αἱ ΑΕ, ΕΓ. have been drawn from (point) E, perpendicular to AB
᾿Επεὶ οὖν εὐθεῖά τις δὶα τοῦ κέντρου ἡ ΕΖ εὐθεῖάν τινα and CD (respectively) [Prop. 1.12]. And let AE and EC
μὴ διὰ τοῦ κέντρου τὴν ΑΒ πρὸς ὀρθὰς τέμνει, καὶ δίχα have been joined.
αὐτὴν τέμνει. ἴση ἄρα ἡ ΑΖ τῇ ΖΒ· διπλῆ ἄρα ἡ ΑΒ τῆς Therefore, since some straight-line, EF, through the
ΑΖ. διὰ τὰ αὐτὰ δὴ καὶ ἡ ΓΔ τῆς ΓΗ ἐστι διπλῆ· καί ἐστιν center (of the circle), cuts some (other) straight-line, AB,
ἴση ἡ ΑΒ τῇ ΓΔ· ἴση ἄρα καὶ ἡ ΑΖ τῇ ΓΗ. καὶ ἐπεὶ ἴση ἐστὶν not through the center, at right-angles, it also cuts it in
ἡ ΑΕ τῇ ΕΓ, ἴσον καὶ τὸ ἀπὸ τῆς ΑΕ τῷ ἀπὸ τῆς ΕΓ. ἀλλὰ half [Prop. 3.3]. Thus, AF (is) equal to FB. Thus, AB
τῷ μὲν ἀπὸ τῆς ΑΕ ἴσα τὰ ἀπὸ τῶν ΑΖ, ΕΖ· ὀρθὴ γὰρ ἡ (is) double AF. So, for the same (reasons), CD is also
πρὸς τῷ Ζ γωνία· τῷ δὲ ἀπὸ τῆς ΕΓ ἴσα τὰ ἀπὸ τῶν ΕΗ, ΗΓ· double CG. And AB is equal to CD. Thus, AF (is)
ὀρθὴ γὰρ ἡ πρὸς τῷ Η γωνία· τὰ ἄρα ἀπὸ τῶν ΑΖ, ΖΕ ἴσα also equal to CG. And since AE is equal to EC, the
ἐστὶ τοῖς ἀπὸ τῶν ΓΗ, ΗΕ, ὧν τὸ ἀπὸ τῆς ΑΖ ἴσον ἐστὶ τῷ (square) on AE (is) also equal to the (square) on EC.
ἀπὸ τῆς ΓΗ· ἴση γάρ ἐστιν ἡ ΑΖ τῇ ΓΗ· λοιπὸν ἄρα τὸ ἀπὸ But, the (sum of the squares) on AF and EF (is) equal
τῆς ΖΕ τῷ ἀπὸ τῆς ΕΗ ἴσον ἐστίν· ἴση ἄρα ἡ ΕΖ τῇ ΕΗ. ἐν to the (square) on AE. For the angle at F (is) a rightδὲ κύκλῳ ἴσον ἀπέχειν ἀπὸ τοῦ κέντρου εὐθεῖαι λέγονται, angle [Prop. 1.47]. And the (sum of the squares) on EG
ὅταν αἱ ἀπὸ τοῦ κέντρου ἐπ᾿ αὐτὰς κάθετοι ἀγόμεναι ἴσαι and GC (is) equal to the (square) on EC. For the angle
ὦσιν· αἱ ἄρα ΑΒ, ΓΔ ἴσον ἀπέχουσιν ἀπὸ τοῦ κέντρου. at G (is) a right-angle [Prop. 1.47]. Thus, the (sum of
᾿Αλλὰ δὴ αἱ ΑΒ, ΓΔ εὐθεῖαι ἴσον ἀπεχέτωσαν ἀπὸ τοῦ the squares) on AF and FE is equal to the (sum of the
κέντρου, τουτέστιν ἴση ἔστω ἡ ΕΖ τῇ ΕΗ. λέγω, ὅτι ἴση squares) on CG and GE, of which the (square) on AF
ἐστὶ καὶ ἡ ΑΒ τῇ ΓΔ. is equal to the (square) on CG. For AF is equal to CG.
84
STOIQEIWN gþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 3
Τῶν γὰρ αὐτῶν κατασκευασθέντων ὁμοίως δείξομεν, Thus, the remaining (square) on FE is equal to the (reὅτι διπλῆ ἐστιν ἡ μὲν ΑΒ τῆς ΑΖ, ἡ δὲ ΓΔ τῆς ΓΗ· καὶ ἐπεὶ maining square) on EG. Thus, EF (is) equal to EG. And
ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ΑΕ τῇ ΓΕ, ἴσον ἐστὶ τὸ ἀπὸ τῆς ΑΕ τῷ ἀπὸ straight-lines in a circle are said to be equally far from
τῆς ΓΕ· ἀλλὰ τῷ μὲν ἀπὸ τῆς ΑΕ ἴσα ἐστὶ τὰ ἀπὸ τῶν ΕΖ, the center when perpendicular (straight-lines) which are
ΖΑ, τῷ δὲ ἀπὸ τῆς ΓΕ ἴσα τὰ ἀπὸ τῶν ΕΗ, ΗΓ. τὰ ἄρα ἀπὸ drawn to them from the center are equal [Def. 3.4]. Thus,
τῶν ΕΖ, ΖΑ ἴσα ἐστὶ τοῖς ἀπὸ τῶν ΕΗ, ΗΓ· ὧν τὸ ἀπὸ τῆς AB and CD are equally far from the center.
ΕΖ τῷ ἀπὸ τῆς ΕΗ ἐστιν ἴσον· ἴση γὰρ ἡ ΕΖ τῇ ΕΗ· λοιπὸν So, let the straight-lines AB and CD be equally far
ἄρα τὸ ἀπὸ τῆς ΑΖ ἴσον ἐστὶ τῷ ἀπὸ τῆς ΓΗ· ἴση ἄρα ἡ ΑΖ from the center. That is to say, let EF be equal to EG. I
τῇ ΓΗ· καί ἐστι τῆς μὲν ΑΖ διπλῆ ἡ ΑΒ, τῆς δὲ ΓΗ διπλῆ say that AB is also equal to CD.
ἡ ΓΔ· ἴση ἄρα ἡ ΑΒ τῇ ΓΔ. For, with the same construction, we can, similarly,
᾿Εν κύκλῳ ἄρα αἱ ἴσαι εὐθεῖαι ἴσον ἀπέχουσιν ἀπὸ show that AB is double AF, and CD (double) CG. And
τοῦ κέντρου, καὶ αἱ ἴσον ἀπέχουσαι ἀπὸ τοῦ κέντρου ἴσαι since AE is equal to CE, the (square) on AE is equal to
ἀλλήλαις εἰσίν· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. the (square) on CE. But, the (sum of the squares) on
EF and FA is equal to the (square) on AE [Prop. 1.47].
And the (sum of the squares) on EG and GC (is) equal
to the (square) on CE [Prop. 1.47]. Thus, the (sum of
the squares) on EF and FA is equal to the (sum of the
squares) on EG and GC, of which the (square) on EF is
equal to the (square) on EG. For EF (is) equal to EG.
Thus, the remaining (square) on AF is equal to the (remaining square) on CG. Thus, AF (is) equal to CG. And
AB is double AF, and CD double CG. Thus, AB (is)
equal to CD.
Thus, in a circle, equal straight-lines are equally far
from the center, and (straight-lines) which are equally far
from the center are equal to one another. (Which is) the
very thing it was required to show.
† The Greek text has “ABCD”, which is obviously a mistake.
ieþ. Proposition 15
᾿Εν κύκλῳ μεγίστη μὲν ἡ διάμετρος, τῶν δὲ ἄλλων ἀεὶ In a circle, a diameter (is) the greatest (straight-line),
ἡ ἔγγιον τοῦ κέντρου τῆς ἀπώτερον μείζων ἐστίν. and for the others, a (straight-line) nearer to the center
῎Εστω κύκλος ὁ ΑΒΓΔ, διάμετρος δὲ αὐτοῦ ἔστω ἡ ΑΔ, is always greater than one further away.
κέντρον δὲ τὸ Ε, καὶ ἔγγιον μὲν τῆς ΑΔ διαμέτρου ἔστω ἡ Let ABCD be a circle, and let AD be its diameter,
ΒΓ, ἀπώτερον δὲ ἡ ΖΗ· λέγω, ὅτι μεγίστη μέν ἐστιν ἡ ΑΔ, and E (its) center. And let BC be nearer to the diameter
μείζων δὲ ἡ ΒΓ τῆς ΖΗ. AD,
† and FG further away. I say that AD is the greatest
῎Ηχθωσαν γὰρ ἀπὸ τοῦ Ε κέντρου ἐπὶ τὰς ΒΓ, ΖΗ (straight-line), and BC (is) greater than FG.
κάθετοι αἱ ΕΘ, ΕΚ. καὶ ἐπεὶ ἔγγιον μὲν τοῦ κέντρου ἐστὶν For let EH and EK have been drawn from the cenἡ ΒΓ, ἀπώτερον δὲ ἡ ΖΗ, μείζων ἄρα ἡ ΕΚ τῆς ΕΘ. κείσθω ter E, at right-angles to BC and FG (respectively)
τῇ ΕΘ ἴση ἡ ΕΛ, καὶ διὰ τοῦ Λ τῇ ΕΚ πρὸς ὀρθὰς ἀχθεῖσα [Prop. 1.12]. And since BC is nearer to the center,
ἡ ΛΜ διήχθω ἐπὶ τὸ Ν, καὶ ἐπεζεύχθωσαν αἱ ΜΕ, ΕΝ, ΖΕ, and FG further away, EK (is) thus greater than EH
ΕΗ. [Def. 3.5]. Let EL be made equal to EH [Prop. 1.3].
Καὶ ἐπεὶ ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ΕΘ τῇ ΕΛ, ἴση ἐστὶ καὶ ἡ ΒΓ τῇ And LM being drawn through L, at right-angles to EK
ΜΝ. πάλιν, ἐπεὶ ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ μὲν ΑΕ τῇ ΕΜ, ἡ δὲ ΕΔ τῇ [Prop. 1.11], let it have been drawn through to N. And
ΕΝ, ἡ ἄρα ΑΔ ταῖς ΜΕ, ΕΝ ἴση ἐστίν. ἀλλ᾿ αἱ μὲν ΜΕ, ΕΝ let ME, EN, FE, and EG have been joined.
τῆς ΜΝ μείζονές εἰσιν [καὶ ἡ ΑΔ τῆς ΜΝ μείζων ἐστίν], And since EH is equal to EL, BC is also equal to
ἴση δὲ ἡ ΜΝ τῇ ΒΓ· ἡ ΑΔ ἄρα τῆς ΒΓ μείζων ἐστίν. καὶ MN [Prop. 3.14]. Again, since AE is equal to EM, and
ἐπεὶ δύο αἱ ΜΕ, ΕΝ δύο ταῖς ΖΕ, ΕΗ ἴσαι εἰσίν, καὶ γωνία ED to EN, AD is thus equal to ME and EN. But, ME
ἡ ὑπὸ ΜΕΝ γωνίας τῆς ὑπὸ ΖΕΗ μείζων [ἐστίν], βάσις ἄρα and EN is greater than MN [Prop. 1.20] [also AD is
85
STOIQEIWN gþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 3
ἡ ΜΝ βάσεως τῆς ΖΗ μείζων ἐστίν. ἀλλὰ ἡ ΜΝ τῇ ΒΓ greater than MN], and MN (is) equal to BC. Thus, AD
ἐδείχθη ἴση [καὶ ἡ ΒΓ τῆς ΖΗ μείζων ἐστίν]. μεγίστη μὲν is greater than BC. And since the two (straight-lines)
ἄρα ἡ ΑΔ διάμετρος, μείζων δὲ ἡ ΒΓ τῆς ΖΗ. ME, EN are equal to the two (straight-lines) FE, EG
(respectively), and angle MEN [is] greater than angle
FEG,
‡
the base MN is thus greater than the base FG
[Prop. 1.24]. But, MN was shown (to be) equal to BC
[(so) BC is also greater than FG]. Thus, the diameter
AD (is) the greatest (straight-line), and BC (is) greater
than FG.
Β
Ν ∆
Γ
Θ
Α
Η
Κ
Λ Ε
Μ
Ζ
M
G
N D
C
H
A
F
L E
B
K
᾿Εν κύκλῳ ἄρα μεγίστη μὲν έστιν ἡ διάμετρος, τῶν δὲ Thus, in a circle, a diameter (is) the greatest (straightἄλλων ἀεὶ ἡ ἔγγιον τοῦ κέντρου τῆς ἀπώτερον μείζων ἐστίν· line), and for the others, a (straight-line) nearer to the
ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. center is always greater than one further away. (Which
is) the very thing it was required to show.
† Euclid should have said “to the center”, rather than ”to the diameter AD”, since BC, AD and F G are not necessarily parallel.
‡ This is not proved, except by reference to the figure.
iþ. Proposition 16
῾Η τῇ διαμέτρῳ τοῦ κύκλου πρὸς ὀρθὰς ἀπ᾿ ἄκρας A (straight-line) drawn at right-angles to the diameter
ἀγομένη ἐκτὸς πεσεῖται τοῦ κύκλου, καὶ εἰς τὸν μεταξὺ of a circle, from its end, will fall outside the circle. And
τόπον τῆς τε εὐθείας καὶ τῆς περιφερείας ἑτέρα εὐθεῖα οὐ another straight-line cannot be inserted into the space beπαρεμπεσεῖται, καὶ ἡ μὲν τοῦ ἡμικυκλίου γωνία ἁπάσης tween the (aforementioned) straight-line and the circumγωνίας ὀξείας εὐθυγράμμου μείζων ἐστίν, ἡ δὲ λοιπὴ ference. And the angle of the semi-circle is greater than
ἐλάττων. any acute rectilinear angle whatsoever, and the remain-
῎Εστω κύκλος ὁ ΑΒΓ περὶ κέντρον τὸ Δ καὶ διάμετρον ing (angle is) less (than any acute rectilinear angle).
τὴν ΑΒ· λέγω, ὅτι ἡ ἀπὸ τοῦ Α τῇ ΑΒ πρὸς ὀρθὰς ἀπ᾿ Let ABC be a circle around the center D and the diἄκρας ἀγομένη ἐκτὸς πεσεῖται τοῦ κύκλου. ameter AB. I say that the (straight-line) drawn from A,
Μὴ γάρ, ἀλλ᾿ εἰ δυνατόν, πιπτέτω ἐντὸς ὡς ἡ ΓΑ, καὶ at right-angles to AB [Prop 1.11], from its end, will fall
ἐπεζεύχθω ἡ ΔΓ. outside the circle.
᾿Επεὶ ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ΔΑ τῇ ΔΓ, ἴση ἐστὶ καὶ γωνία ἡ ὑπὸ For (if) not then, if possible, let it fall inside, like CA
ΔΑΓ γωνίᾳ τῇ ὑπὸ ΑΓΔ. ὀρθὴ δὲ ἡ ὑπὸ ΔΑΓ· ὀρθὴ ἄρα (in the figure), and let DC have been joined.
καὶ ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΓΔ· τριγώνου δὴ τοῦ ΑΓΔ αἱ δύο γωνίαι αἱ Since DA is equal to DC, angle DAC is also equal
ὑπὸ ΔΑΓ, ΑΓΔ δύο ὀρθαῖς ἴσαι εἰσίν· ὅπερ ἐστὶν ἀδύνατον. to angle ACD [Prop. 1.5]. And DAC (is) a right-angle.
οὐκ ἄρα ἡ ἀπὸ τοῦ Α σημείου τῇ ΒΑ πρὸς ὀρθὰς ἀγομένη Thus, ACD (is) also a right-angle. So, in triangle ACD,
ἐντὸς πεσεῖται τοῦ κύκλου. ὁμοίως δὴ δεῖξομεν, ὅτι οὐδ᾿ the two angles DAC and ACD are equal to two rightἐπὶ τῆς περιφερείας· ἐκτὸς ἄρα. angles. The very thing is impossible [Prop. 1.17]. Thus,
the (straight-line) drawn from point A, at right-angles
86
STOIQEIWN gþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 3
to BA, will not fall inside the circle. So, similarly, we
can show that neither (will it fall) on the circumference.
Thus, (it will fall) outside (the circle).
Η
Α
Β
∆
Γ
Ζ
Ε
Θ H
F
E
G
D
B
A
C
Πιπτέτω ὡς ἡ ΑΕ· λέγω δή, ὅτι εἰς τὸν μεταξὺ τόπον Let it fall like AE (in the figure). So, I say that another
τῆς τε ΑΕ εὐθείας καὶ τῆς ΓΘΑ περιφερείας ἑτέρα εὐθεῖα straight-line cannot be inserted into the space between
οὐ παρεμπεσεῖται. the straight-line AE and the circumference CHA.
Εἰ γὰρ δυνατόν, παρεμπιπτέτω ὡς ἡ ΖΑ, καὶ ἤχθω ἀπὸ For, if possible, let it be inserted like FA (in the figτοῦ Δ σημείου ἐπὶ τῆν ΖΑ κάθετος ἡ ΔΗ. καὶ ἐπεὶ ὀρθή ure), and let DG have been drawn from point D, perpenἐστιν ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΗΔ, ἐλάττων δὲ ὀρθῆς ἡ ὑπὸ ΔΑΗ, μείζων dicular to FA [Prop. 1.12]. And since AGD is a rightἄρα ἡ ΑΔ τῆς ΔΗ. ἴση δὲ ἡ ΔΑ τῇ ΔΘ· μείζων ἄρα ἡ ΔΘ angle, and DAG (is) less than a right-angle, AD (is)
τῆς ΔΗ, ἡ ἐλάττων τῆς μείζονος· ὅπερ ἐστὶν ἀδύνατον. οὐκ thus greater than DG [Prop. 1.19]. And DA (is) equal
ἄρα εἰς τὸν μεταξὺ τόπον τῆς τε εὐθείας καὶ τῆς περιφερείας to DH. Thus, DH (is) greater than DG, the lesser than
ἑτέρα εὐθεῖα παρεμπεσεῖται. the greater. The very thing is impossible. Thus, another
Λέγω, ὅτι καὶ ἡ μὲν τοῦ ἡμικυκλίου γωνία ἡ περιεχομένη straight-line cannot be inserted into the space between
ὑπό τε τῆς ΒΑ εὐθείας καὶ τῆς ΓΘΑ περιφερείας ἁπάσης the straight-line (AE) and the circumference.
γωνίας ὀξείας εὐθυγράμμου μείζων ἐστίν, ἡ δὲ λοιπὴ ἡ πε- And I also say that the semi-circular angle contained
ριεχομένη ὑπό τε τῆς ΓΘΑ περιφερείας καὶ τῆς ΑΕ εὐθείας by the straight-line BA and the circumference CHA is
ἁπάσης γωνίας ὀξείας εὐθυγράμμου ἐλάττων ἐστίν. greater than any acute rectilinear angle whatsoever, and
Εἰ γὰρ ἐστί τις γωνία εὐθύγραμμος μείζων μὲν τῆς the remaining (angle) contained by the circumference
περιεχομένης ὑπό τε τῆς ΒΑ εὐθείας καὶ τῆς ΓΘΑ περι- CHA and the straight-line AE is less than any acute recφερείας, ἐλάττων δὲ τῆς περιεχομένης ὑπό τε τῆς ΓΘΑ tilinear angle whatsoever.
περιφερείας καὶ τὴς ΑΕ εὐθείας, εἰς τὸν μεταξὺ τόπον τῆς For if any rectilinear angle is greater than the (anτε ΓΘΑ περιφερείας καὶ τῆς ΑΕ εὐθείας εὐθεῖα παρεμ- gle) contained by the straight-line BA and the circumπεσεῖται, ἥτις ποιήσει μείζονα μὲν τῆς περιεχομένης ὑπὸ ference CHA, or less than the (angle) contained by the
τε τῆς ΒΑ εὐθείας καὶ τῆς ΓΘΑ περιφερείας ὑπὸ εὐθειῶν circumference CHA and the straight-line AE, then a
περιεχομένην, ἐλάττονα δὲ τῆς περιεχομένης ὑπό τε τῆς straight-line can be inserted into the space between the
ΓΘΑ περιφερείας καὶ τῆς ΑΕ εὐθείας. οὐ παρεμπίπτει δέ· circumference CHA and the straight-line AE—anything
οὐκ ἄρα τῆς περιεχομένης γωνίας ὑπό τε τῆς ΒΑ εὐθείας which will make (an angle) contained by straight-lines
καὶ τῆς ΓΘΑ περιφερείας ἔσται μείζων ὀξεῖα ὑπὸ εὐθειῶν greater than the angle contained by the straight-line BA
περιεχομένη, οὐδὲ μὴν ἐλάττων τῆς περιεχομένης ὑπό τε and the circumference CHA, or less than the (angle)
τῆς ΓΘΑ περιφερείας καὶ τῆς ΑΕ εὐθείας. contained by the circumference CHA and the straightline AE. But (such a straight-line) cannot be inserted.
Thus, an acute (angle) contained by straight-lines cannot
be greater than the angle contained by the straight-line
BA and the circumference CHA, neither (can it be) less
than the (angle) contained by the circumference CHA
and the straight-line AE.
87
STOIQEIWN gþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 3
Pìrisma. Corollary
᾿Εκ δὴ τούτου φανερόν, ὅτι ἡ τῇ διαμέτρῳ τοῦ κύκλου So, from this, (it is) manifest that a (straight-line)
πρὸς ὀρθὰς ἀπ᾿ ἄκρας ἀγομένη ἐφάπτεται τοῦ κύκλου drawn at right-angles to the diameter of a circle, from
[καὶ ὅτι εὐθεῖα κύκλου καθ᾿ ἓν μόνον ἐφάπτεται σημεῖον, its extremity, touches the circle [and that the straight-line
ἐπειδήπερ καὶ ἡ κατὰ δύο αὐτῷ συμβάλλουσα ἐντὸς αὐτοῦ touches the circle at a single point, inasmuch as it was
πίπτουσα ἐδείχθη]· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. also shown that a (straight-line) meeting (the circle) at
two (points) falls inside it [Prop. 3.2] ]. (Which is) the
very thing it was required to show.
izþ. Proposition 17
᾿Απὸ τοῦ δοθέντος σημείου τοῦ δοθέντος κύκλου ἐφα- To draw a straight-line touching a given circle from a
πτομένην εὐθεῖαν γραμμὴν ἀγαγεῖν. given point.
∆
Ε
Α
Γ Η
Β
Ζ
D
A
C G
E
B
F
῎Εστω τὸ μὲν δοθὲν σημεῖον τὸ Α, ὁ δὲ δοθεὶς κύκλος Let A be the given point, and BCD the given circle.
ὁ ΒΓΔ· δεῖ δὴ ἀπὸ τοῦ Α σημείου τοῦ ΒΓΔ κύκλου ἐφα- So it is required to draw a straight-line touching circle
πτομένην εὐθεῖαν γραμμὴν ἀγαγεῖν. BCD from point A.
Εἰλήφθω γὰρ τὸ κέντρον τοῦ κύκλου τὸ Ε, καὶ For let the center E of the circle have been found
ἐπεζεύχθω ἡ ΑΕ, καὶ κέντρῳ μὲν τῷ Ε διαστήματι δὲ τῷ [Prop. 3.1], and let AE have been joined. And let (the
ΕΑ κύκλος γεγράφθω ὁ ΑΖΗ, καὶ ἀπὸ τοῦ Δ τῇ ΕΑ πρὸς circle) AFG have been drawn with center E and radius
ὀρθὰς ἤχθω ἡ ΔΖ, καὶ ἐπεζεύχθωσαν αἱ ΕΖ, ΑΒ· λέγω, EA. And let DF have been drawn from from (point) D,
ὅτι ἀπὸ τοῦ Α σημείου τοῦ ΒΓΔ κύκλου ἐφαπτομένη ἦκται at right-angles to EA [Prop. 1.11]. And let EF and AB
ἡ ΑΒ. have been joined. I say that the (straight-line) AB has
᾿Επεὶ γὰρ τὸ Ε κέντρον ἐστὶ τῶν ΒΓΔ, ΑΖΗ κύκλων, been drawn from point A touching circle BCD.
ἴση ἄρα ἐστὶν ἡ μὲν ΕΑ τῇ ΕΖ, ἡ δὲ ΕΔ τῇ ΕΒ· δύο δὴ For since E is the center of circles BCD and AFG,
αἱ ΑΕ, ΕΒ δύο ταῖς ΖΕ, ΕΔ ἴσαι εἰσίν· καὶ γωνίαν κοινὴν EA is thus equal to EF, and ED to EB. So the two
περιέχουσι τὴν πρὸς τῷ Ε· βάσις ἄρα ἡ ΔΖ βάσει τῇ ΑΒ (straight-lines) AE, EB are equal to the two (straightἴση ἐστίν, καὶ τὸ ΔΕΖ τρίγωνον τῷ ΕΒΑ τριγώνῳ ἴσον lines) FE, ED (respectively). And they contain a comἐστίν, καὶ αἱ λοιπαὶ γωνίαι ταῖς λοιπαῖς γωνίαις· ἴση ἄρα ἡ mon angle at E. Thus, the base DF is equal to the
ὑπὸ ΕΔΖ τῇ ὑπὸ ΕΒΑ. ὀρθὴ δὲ ἡ ὑπὸ ΕΔΖ· ὀρθὴ ἄρα καὶ ἡ base AB, and triangle DEF is equal to triangle EBA,
ὑπὸ ΕΒΑ. καί ἐστιν ἡ ΕΒ ἐκ τοῦ κέντρου· ἡ δὲ τῇ διαμέτρῳ and the remaining angles (are equal) to the (correτοῦ κύκλου πρὸς ὀρθὰς ἀπ᾿ ἄκρας ἀγομένη ἐφάπτεται τοῦ sponding) remaining angles [Prop. 1.4]. Thus, (angle)
κύκλου· ἡ ΑΒ ἄρα ἐφάπτεται τοῦ ΒΓΔ κύκλου. EDF (is) equal to EBA. And EDF (is) a right-angle.
᾿Απὸ τοῦ ἄρα δοθέντος σημείου τοῦ Α τοῦ δοθέντος Thus, EBA (is) also a right-angle. And EB is a raκύκλου τοῦ ΒΓΔ ἐφαπτομένη εὐθεῖα γραμμὴ ἦκται ἡ ΑΒ· dius. And a (straight-line) drawn at right-angles to the
ὅπερ ἔδει ποιῆσαι. diameter of a circle, from its extremity, touches the circle
[Prop. 3.16 corr.]. Thus, AB touches circle BCD.
Thus, the straight-line AB has been drawn touching
88
STOIQEIWN gþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 3
the given circle BCD from the given point A. (Which is)
the very thing it was required to do.
ihþ. Proposition 18
᾿Εὰν κύκλου ἐφάπτηταί τις εὐθεῖα, ἀπὸ δὲ τοῦ κέντρου If some straight-line touches a circle, and some
ἐπὶ τὴν ἁφὴν ἐπιζευχθῇ τις εὐθεῖα, ἡ ἐπιζευχθεῖσα κάθετος (other) straight-line is joined from the center (of the cirἔσται ἐπὶ τὴν ἐφαπτομένην. cle) to the point of contact, then the (straight-line) so
joined will be perpendicular to the tangent.
Α
Ε
Η
∆
Γ
Ζ
Β
D
A
G
C
E
F
B
Κύκλου γὰρ τοῦ ΑΒΓ ἐφαπτέσθω τις εὐθεῖα ἡ ΔΕ κατὰ For let some straight-line DE touch the circle ABC at
τὸ Γ σημεῖον, καὶ εἰλήφθω τὸ κέντρον τοῦ ΑΒΓ κύκλου τὸ point C, and let the center F of circle ABC have been
Ζ, καὶ ἀπὸ τοῦ Ζ ἐπὶ τὸ Γ ἐπεζεύχθω ἡ ΖΓ· λέγω, ὅτι ἡ ΖΓ found [Prop. 3.1], and let FC have been joined from F
κάθετός ἐστιν ἐπὶ τὴν ΔΕ. to C. I say that FC is perpendicular to DE.
Εἰ γὰρ μή, ἤχθω ἀπὸ τοῦ Ζ ἐπὶ τὴν ΔΕ κάθετος ἡ ΖΗ. For if not, let FG have been drawn from F, perpen-
᾿Επεὶ οὖν ἡ ὑπὸ ΖΗΓ γωνία ὀρθή ἐστιν, ὀξεῖα ἄρα ἐστὶν dicular to DE [Prop. 1.12].
ἡ ὑπὸ ΖΓΗ· ὑπὸ δὲ τὴν μείζονα γωνίαν ἡ μείζων πλευρὰ Therefore, since angle FGC is a right-angle, (angle)
ὑποτείνει· μείζων ἄρα ἡ ΖΓ τῆς ΖΗ· ἴση δὲ ἡ ΖΓ τῇ ΖΒ· FCG is thus acute [Prop. 1.17]. And the greater angle is
μείζων ἄρα καὶ ἡ ΖΒ τῆς ΖΗ ἡ ἐλάττων τῆς μείζονος· ὅπερ subtended by the greater side [Prop. 1.19]. Thus, FC (is)
ἐστὶν ἀδύνατον. οὐκ ἄρα ἡ ΖΗ κάθετός ἐστιν ἐπὶ τὴν ΔΕ. greater than FG. And FC (is) equal to FB. Thus, FB
ὁμοίως δὴ δεῖξομεν, ὅτι οὐδ᾿ ἄλλη τις πλὴν τῆς ΖΓ· ἡ ΖΓ (is) also greater than FG, the lesser than the greater. The
ἄρα κάθετός ἐστιν ἐπὶ τὴν ΔΕ. very thing is impossible. Thus, FG is not perpendicular to
᾿Εὰν ἄρα κύκλου ἐφάπτηταί τις εὐθεῖα, ἀπὸ δὲ τοῦ DE. So, similarly, we can show that neither (is) any other
κέντρου ἐπὶ τὴν ἁφὴν ἐπιζευχθῇ τις εὐθεῖα, ἡ ἐπιζευχθεῖσα (straight-line) except FC. Thus, FC is perpendicular to
κάθετος ἔσται ἐπὶ τὴν ἐφαπτομένην· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. DE.
Thus, if some straight-line touches a circle, and some
(other) straight-line is joined from the center (of the circle) to the point of contact, then the (straight-line) so
joined will be perpendicular to the tangent. (Which is)
the very thing it was required to show.
ijþ. Proposition 19
᾿Εὰν κύκλου ἐφάπτηταί τις εὐθεῖα, ἀπὸ δὲ τῆς ἁφῆς τῇ If some straight-line touches a circle, and a straightἐφαπτομένῃ πρὸς ὀρθὰς [γωνίας] εὐθεῖα γραμμὴ ἀχθῇ, ἐπὶ line is drawn from the point of contact, at right-[angles]
τῆς ἀχθείσης ἔσται τὸ κέντρον τοῦ κύκλου. to the tangent, then the center (of the circle) will be on
Κύκλου γὰρ τοῦ ΑΒΓ ἐφαπτέσθω τις εὐθεῖα ἡ ΔΕ κατὰ the (straight-line) so drawn.
τὸ Γ σημεῖον, καὶ ἀπὸ τοῦ Γ τῇ ΔΕ πρὸς ὀρθὰς ἤχθω ἡ For let some straight-line DE touch the circle ABC at
ΓΑ· λέγω, ὅτι ἐπὶ τῆς ΑΓ ἐστι τὸ κέντρον τοῦ κύκλου. point C. And let CA have been drawn from C, at right89
STOIQEIWN gþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 3
angles to DE [Prop. 1.11]. I say that the center of the
circle is on AC.
Β
Ε
Ζ
∆
Α
Γ
B
D E C
F
A
Μὴ γάρ, ἀλλ᾿ εἰ δυνατόν, ἔστω τὸ Ζ, καὶ ἐπεζεύχθω ἡ For (if) not, if possible, let F be (the center of the
ΓΖ. circle), and let CF have been joined.
᾿Επεὶ [οὖν] κύκλου τοῦ ΑΒΓ ἐφάπτεταί τις εὐθεῖα ἡ ΔΕ, [Therefore], since some straight-line DE touches the
ἀπὸ δὲ τοῦ κέντρου ἐπὶ τὴν ἁφὴν ἐπέζευκται ἡ ΖΓ, ἡ ΖΓ ἄρα circle ABC, and FC has been joined from the center to
κάθετός ἐστιν ἐπὶ τὴν ΔΕ· ὀρθὴ ἄρα ἐστὶν ἡ ὑπὸ ΖΓΕ. ἐστὶ the point of contact, FC is thus perpendicular to DE
δὲ καὶ ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΓΕ ὀρθή· ἴση ἄρα ἐστὶν ἡ ὑπὸ ΖΓΕ τῇ ὑπὸ [Prop. 3.18]. Thus, FCE is a right-angle. And ACE
ΑΓΕ ἡ ἐλάττων τῇ μείζονι· ὅπερ ἐστὶν ἀδύνατον. οὐκ ἄρα is also a right-angle. Thus, FCE is equal to ACE, the
τὸ Ζ κέντρον ἐστὶ τοῦ ΑΒΓ κύκλου. ὁμοίως δὴ δείξομεν, lesser to the greater. The very thing is impossible. Thus,
ὅτι οὐδ᾿ ἄλλο τι πλὴν ἐπὶ τῆς ΑΓ. F is not the center of circle ABC. So, similarly, we can
᾿Εὰν ἄρα κύκλου ἐφάπτηταί τις εὐθεῖα, ἀπὸ δὲ τῆς ἁφῆς show that neither is any (point) other (than one) on AC.
τῇ ἐφαπτομένῃ πρὸς ὀρθὰς εὐθεῖα γραμμὴ ἀχθῇ, ἐπὶ τῆς
ἀχθείσης ἔσται τὸ κέντρον τοῦ κύκλου· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. Thus, if some straight-line touches a circle, and a straightline is drawn from the point of contact, at right-angles to
the tangent, then the center (of the circle) will be on the
(straight-line) so drawn. (Which is) the very thing it was
required to show.
kþ. Proposition 20
᾿Εν κύκλῳ ἡ πρὸς τῷ κέντρῳ γωνία διπλασίων ἐστὶ τῆς In a circle, the angle at the center is double that at the
πρὸς τῇ περιφερείᾳ, ὅταν τὴν αὐτὴν περιφέρειαν βάσιν ἔχω- circumference, when the angles have the same circumferσιν αἱ γωνίαι. ence base.
῎Εστω κύκλος ὁ ΑΒΓ, καὶ πρὸς μὲν τῷ κέντρῳ αὐτοῦ Let ABC be a circle, and let BEC be an angle at its
γωνία ἔστω ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΕΓ, πρὸς δὲ τῇ περιφερείᾳ ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΑΓ, center, and BAC (one) at (its) circumference. And let
ἐχέτωσαν δὲ τὴν αὐτὴν περιφέρειαν βάσιν τὴν ΒΓ· λέγω, them have the same circumference base BC. I say that
ὅτι διπλασίων ἐστὶν ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΕΓ γωνία τῆς ὑπὸ ΒΑΓ. angle BEC is double (angle) BAC.
᾿Επιζευχθεῖσα γὰρ ἡ ΑΕ διήχθω ἐπὶ τὸ Ζ. For being joined, let AE have been drawn through to
᾿Επεὶ οὖν ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ΕΑ τῇ ΕΒ, ἴση καὶ γωνία ἡ ὑπὸ F.
ΕΑΒ τῇ ὑπὸ ΕΒΑ· αἱ ἄρα ὑπὸ ΕΑΒ, ΕΒΑ γωνίαι τῆς ὑπὸ Therefore, since EA is equal to EB, angle EAB (is)
ΕΑΒ διπλασίους εἰσίν. ἴση δὲ ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΕΖ ταῖς ὑπὸ ΕΑΒ, also equal to EBA [Prop. 1.5]. Thus, angle EAB and
ΕΒΑ· καὶ ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΕΖ ἄρα τῆς ὑπὸ ΕΑΒ ἐστι διπλῆ. διὰ τὰ EBA is double (angle) EAB. And BEF (is) equal to
αὐτὰ δὴ καὶ ἡ ὑπὸ ΖΕΓ τῆς ὑπὸ ΕΑΓ ἐστι διπλῆ. ὅλη ἄρα EAB and EBA [Prop. 1.32]. Thus, BEF is also double
ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΕΓ ὅλης τῆς ὑπὸ ΒΑΓ ἐστι διπλῆ. EAB. So, for the same (reasons), FEC is also double
EAC. Thus, the whole (angle) BEC is double the whole
(angle) BAC.
90
STOIQEIWN gþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 3
Ε
Β
Ζ
Γ
∆
Η
Α
E
A
C
B
G F
D
Κεκλάσθω δὴ πάλιν, καὶ ἔστω ἑτέρα γωνία ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΔΓ, So let another (straight-line) have been inflected, and
καὶ ἐπιζευχθεῖσα ἡ ΔΕ ἐκβεβλήσθω ἐπὶ τὸ Η. ὁμοίως δὴ let there be another angle, BDC. And DE being joined,
δείξομεν, ὅτι διπλῆ ἐστιν ἡ ὑπὸ ΗΕΓ γωνία τῆς ὑπὸ ΕΔΓ, let it have been produced to G. So, similarly, we can show
ὧν ἡ ὑπὸ ΗΕΒ διπλῆ ἐστι τῆς ὑπὸ ΕΔΒ· λοιπὴ ἄρα ἡ ὑπὸ that angle GEC is double EDC, of which GEB is double
ΒΕΓ διπλῆ ἐστι τῆς ὑπὸ ΒΔΓ. EDB. Thus, the remaining (angle) BEC is double the
᾿Εν κύκλῳ ἄρα ἡ πρὸς τῷ κέντρῳ γωνία διπλασίων ἐστὶ (remaining angle) BDC.
τῆς πρὸς τῇ περιφερείᾳ, ὅταν τὴν αὐτὴν περιφέρειαν βάσιν Thus, in a circle, the angle at the center is double that
ἔχωσιν [αἱ γωνίαι]· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. at the circumference, when [the angles] have the same
circumference base. (Which is) the very thing it was required to show.
kaþ. Proposition 21
᾿Εν κύκλῳ αἱ ἐν τῷ αὐτῷ τμήματι γωνίαι ἴσαι ἀλλήλαις In a circle, angles in the same segment are equal to
εἰσίν. one another.
Α
Ε
Γ
Ζ
Β ∆ D
A
B
F E
C
῎Εστω κύκλος ὁ ΑΒΓΔ, καὶ ἐν τῷ αὐτῷ τμήματι τῷ Let ABCD be a circle, and let BAD and BED be
ΒΑΕΔ γωνίαι ἔστωσαν αἱ ὑπὸ ΒΑΔ, ΒΕΔ· λέγω, ὅτι αἱ angles in the same segment BAED. I say that angles
ὑπὸ ΒΑΔ, ΒΕΔ γωνίαι ἴσαι ἀλλήλαις εἰσίν. BAD and BED are equal to one another.
Εἰλήφθω γὰρ τοῦ ΑΒΓΔ κύκλου τὸ κέντρον, καὶ ἔστω For let the center of circle ABCD have been found
τὸ Ζ, καὶ ἐπεζεύχθωσαν αἱ ΒΖ, ΖΔ. [Prop. 3.1], and let it be (at point) F. And let BF and
Καὶ ἐπεὶ ἡ μὲν ὑπὸ ΒΖΔ γωνία πρὸς τῷ κέντρῳ ἐστίν, ἡ FD have been joined.
δὲ ὑπὸ ΒΑΔ πρὸς τῇ περιφερείᾳ, καὶ ἔχουσι τὴν αὐτὴν πε- And since angle BFD is at the center, and BAD at
ριφέρειαν βάσιν τὴν ΒΓΔ, ἡ ἄρα ὑπὸ ΒΖΔ γωνία διπλασίων the circumference, and they have the same circumference
ἐστὶ τῆς ὑπὸ ΒΑΔ. διὰ τὰ αὐτὰ δὴ ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΖΔ καὶ τῆς ὑπὸ base BCD, angle BFD is thus double BAD [Prop. 3.20].
91
STOIQEIWN gþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 3
ΒΕΔ ἐστι διπλσίων· ἴση ἄρα ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΑΔ τῇ ὑπὸ ΒΕΔ. So, for the same (reasons), BFD is also double BED.
᾿Εν κύκλῳ ἄρα αἱ ἐν τῷ αὐτῷ τμήματι γωνίαι ἴσαι Thus, BAD (is) equal to BED.
ἀλλήλαις εἰσίν· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. Thus, in a circle, angles in the same segment are equal
to one another. (Which is) the very thing it was required
to show.
kbþ. Proposition 22
Τῶν ἐν τοῖς κύκλοις τετραπλεύρων αἱ ἀπεναντίον γωνίαι For quadrilaterals within circles, the (sum of the) opδυσὶν ὀρθαῖς ἴσαι εἰσίν. posite angles is equal to two right-angles.
∆
Β
Γ
Α
D
A
B
C
῎Εστω κύκλος ὁ ΑΒΓΔ, καὶ ἐν αὐτῷ τετράπλευρον ἔστω Let ABCD be a circle, and let ABCD be a quadrilatτὸ ΑΒΓΔ· λέγω, ὅτι αἱ ἀπεναντίον γωνίαι δυσὶν ὀρθαῖς ἴσαι eral within it. I say that the (sum of the) opposite angles
εἰσίν. is equal to two right-angles.
᾿Επεζεύχθωσαν αἱ ΑΓ, ΒΔ. Let AC and BD have been joined.
᾿Επεὶ οὖν παντὸς τριγώνου αἱ τρεῖς γωνίαι δυσὶν ὀρθαῖς Therefore, since the three angles of any triangle are
ἴσαι εἰσίν, τοῦ ΑΒΓ ἄρα τριγώνου αἱ τρεῖς γωνίαι αἱ ὑπὸ equal to two right-angles [Prop. 1.32], the three angles
ΓΑΒ, ΑΒΓ, ΒΓΑ δυσὶν ὀρθαῖς ἴσαι εἰσίν. ἴση δὲ ἡ μὲν ὑπὸ CAB, ABC, and BCA of triangle ABC are thus equal
ΓΑΒ τῇ ὑπὸ ΒΔΓ· ἐν γὰρ τῷ αὐτῷ τμήματί εἰσι τῷ ΒΑΔΓ· to two right-angles. And CAB (is) equal to BDC. For
ἡ δὲ ὑπὸ ΑΓΒ τῇ ὑπὸ ΑΔΒ· ἐν γὰρ τῷ αὐτῷ τμήματί εἰσι they are in the same segment BADC [Prop. 3.21]. And
τῷ ΑΔΓΒ· ὅλη ἄρα ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΔΓ ταῖς ὑπὸ ΒΑΓ, ΑΓΒ ἴση ACB (is equal) to ADB. For they are in the same segἐστίν. κοινὴ προσκείσθω ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΒΓ· αἱ ἄρα ὑπὸ ΑΒΓ, ment ADCB [Prop. 3.21]. Thus, the whole of ADC is
ΒΑΓ, ΑΓΒ ταῖς ὑπὸ ΑΒΓ, ΑΔΓ ἴσαι εἰσίν. ἀλλ᾿ αἱ ὑπὸ equal to BAC and ACB. Let ABC have been added to
ΑΒΓ, ΒΑΓ, ΑΓΒ δυσὶν ὀρθαῖς ἴσαι εἰσίν. καὶ αἱ ὑπὸ ΑΒΓ, both. Thus, ABC, BAC, and ACB are equal to ABC
ΑΔΓ ἄρα δυσὶν ὀρθαῖς ἴσαι εἰσίν. ὁμοίως δὴ δείξομεν, ὅτι and ADC. But, ABC, BAC, and ACB are equal to two
καὶ αἱ ὑπὸ ΒΑΔ, ΔΓΒ γωνίαι δυσὶν ὀρθαῖς ἴσαι εἰσίν. right-angles. Thus, ABC and ADC are also equal to two
Τῶν ἄρα ἐν τοῖς κύκλοις τετραπλεύρων αἱ ἀπεναντίον right-angles. Similarly, we can show that angles BAD
γωνίαι δυσὶν ὀρθαῖς ἴσαι εἰσίν· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. and DCB are also equal to two right-angles.
Thus, for quadrilaterals within circles, the (sum of
the) opposite angles is equal to two right-angles. (Which
is) the very thing it was required to show.
kgþ. Proposition 23
᾿Επὶ τῆς αὐτῆς εὐθείας δύο τμήματα κύκλων ὅμοια καὶ Two similar and unequal segments of circles cannot be
ἄνισα οὐ συσταθήσεται ἐπὶ τὰ αὐτὰ μέρη. constructed on the same side of the same straight-line.
Εἰ γὰρ δυνατόν, ἐπὶ τῆς αὐτῆς εὐθείας τῆς ΑΒ δύο For, if possible, let the two similar and unequal segτμήματα κύκλων ὅμοια καὶ ἄνισα συνεστάτω ἐπὶ τὰ αὐτὰ ments of circles, ACB and ADB, have been constructed
μέρη τὰ ΑΓΒ, ΑΔΒ, καὶ διήχθω ἡ ΑΓΔ, καὶ ἐπεζεύχθωσαν on the same side of the same straight-line AB. And let
92
STOIQEIWN gþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 3
αἱ ΓΒ, ΔΒ. ACD have been drawn through (the segments), and let
CB and DB have been joined.
Γ
∆
Α Β
C
A B
D
᾿Επεὶ οὖν ὅμοιόν ἐστι τὸ ΑΓΒ τμῆμα τῷ ΑΔΒ τμήματι, Therefore, since segment ACB is similar to segment
ὅμοια δὲ τμήματα κύκλων ἐστὶ τὰ δεχόμενα γωνίας ἴσας, ADB, and similar segments of circles are those acceptἴση ἄρα ἐστὶν ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΓΒ γωνία τῇ ὑπὸ ΑΔΒ ἡ ἐκτὸς τῇ ing equal angles [Def. 3.11], angle ACB is thus equal
ἐντός· ὅπερ ἐστὶν ἀδύνατον. to ADB, the external to the internal. The very thing is
Οὐκ ἄρα ἐπὶ τῆς αὐτῆς εὐθείας δύο τμήματα κύκλων impossible [Prop. 1.16].
ὅμοια καὶ ἄνισα συσταθήσεται ἐπὶ τὰ αὐτὰ μέρη· ὅπερ ἔδει Thus, two similar and unequal segments of circles
δεῖξαι. cannot be constructed on the same side of the same
straight-line.
kdþ. Proposition 24
Τὰ ἐπὶ ἴσων εὐθειῶν ὅμοια τμήματα κύλων ἴσα ἀλλήλοις Similar segments of circles on equal straight-lines are
ἐστίν. equal to one another.
Ζ
Α Β
Ε
Γ
Η
∆
F
A B
E
C D
G
῎Εστωσαν γὰρ ἐπὶ ἴσων εὐθειῶν τῶν ΑΒ, ΓΔ ὅμοια For let AEB and CFD be similar segments of circles
τμήματα κύκλων τὰ ΑΕΒ, ΓΖΔ· λέγω, ὅτι ἴσον ἐστὶ τὸ on the equal straight-lines AB and CD (respectively). I
ΑΕΒ τμῆμα τῷ ΓΖΔ τμήματι. say that segment AEB is equal to segment CFD.
᾿Εφαρμοζομένου γὰρ τοῦ ΑΕΒ τμήματος ἐπὶ τὸ ΓΖΔ καὶ For if the segment AEB is applied to the segment
τιθεμένου τοῦ μὲν Α σημείου ἐπὶ τὸ Γ τῆς δὲ ΑΒ εὐθείας CFD, and point A is placed on (point) C, and the
ἐπὶ τὴν ΓΔ, ἐφαρμόσει καὶ τὸ Β σημεῖον ἐπὶ τὸ Δ σημεῖον straight-line AB on CD, then point B will also coincide
διὰ τὸ ἴσην εἶναι τὴν ΑΒ τῇ ΓΔ· τῆς δὲ ΑΒ ἐπὶ τὴν ΓΔ ἐφαρ- with point D, on account of AB being equal to CD. And
μοσάσης ἐφαρμόσει καὶ τὸ ΑΕΒ τμῆμα ἐπὶ τὸ ΓΖΔ. εἰ γὰρ if AB coincides with CD then the segment AEB will also
ἡ ΑΒ εὐθεῖα ἐπὶ τὴν ΓΔ ἐφαρμόσει, τὸ δὲ ΑΕΒ τμῆμα ἐπὶ coincide with CFD. For if the straight-line AB coincides
τὸ ΓΖΔ μὴ ἐφαρμόσει, ἤτοι ἐντὸς αὐτοῦ πεσεῖται ἢ ἐκτὸς with CD, and the segment AEB does not coincide with
ἢ παραλλάξει, ὡς τὸ ΓΗΔ, καὶ κύκλος κύκλον τέμνει κατὰ CFD, then it will surely either fall inside it, outside (it),†
πλείονα σημεῖα ἢ δύο· ὅπερ ἐστίν ἀδύνατον. οὐκ ἄρα ἐφαρ- or it will miss like CGD (in the figure), and a circle (will)
μοζομένης τῆς ΑΒ εὐθείας ἐπὶ τὴν ΓΔ οὐκ ἐφαρμόσει καὶ cut (another) circle at more than two points. The very
93
STOIQEIWN gþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 3
τὸ ΑΕΒ τμῆμα ἐπὶ τὸ ΓΖΔ· ἐφαρμόσει ἄρα, καὶ ἴσον αὐτῷ thing is impossible [Prop. 3.10]. Thus, if the straight-line
ἔσται. AB is applied to CD, the segment AEB cannot not also
Τὰ ἄρα ἐπὶ ἴσων εὐθειῶν ὅμοια τμήματα κύκλων ἴσα coincide with CFD. Thus, it will coincide, and will be
ἀλλήλοις ἐστίν· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. equal to it [C.N. 4].
Thus, similar segments of circles on equal straightlines are equal to one another. (Which is) the very thing
it was required to show.
† Both this possibility, and the previous one, are precluded by Prop. 3.23.
keþ. Proposition 25
Κύκλου τμήματος δοθέντος προσαναγράψαι τὸν κύκλον, For a given segment of a circle, to complete the circle,
οὗπέρ ἐστι τμῆμα. the very one of which it is a segment.
Ε
Α
∆ ∆
Α
Β
Γ
Β
Γ
Α
∆
Γ
Β Ε
C C
D
A A
D
C
E
B B B
A
D E
῎Εστω τὸ δοθὲν τμῆμα κύκλου τὸ ΑΒΓ· δεῖ δὴ τοῦ ΑΒΓ Let ABC be the given segment of a circle. So it is reτμήματος προσαναγράψαι τὸν κύκλον, οὖπέρ ἐστι τμῆμα. quired to complete the circle for segment ABC, the very
Τετμήσθω γὰρ ἡ ΑΓ δίχα κατὰ τὸ Δ, καὶ ἤχθω ἀπὸ τοῦ one of which it is a segment.
Δ σημείου τῇ ΑΓ πρὸς ὀρθὰς ἡ ΔΒ, καὶ ἐπεζεύχθω ἡ ΑΒ· For let AC have been cut in half at (point) D
ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΒΔ γωνία ἄρα τῆς ὑπὸ ΒΑΔ ἤτοι μείζων ἐστὶν ἢ [Prop. 1.10], and let DB have been drawn from point
ἴση ἢ ἐλάττων. D, at right-angles to AC [Prop. 1.11]. And let AB have
῎Εστω πρότερον μείζων, καὶ συνεστάτω πρὸς τῇ ΒΑ been joined. Thus, angle ABD is surely either greater
εὐθείᾳ καὶ τῷ πρὸς αὐτῇ σημείῳ τῷ Α τῇ ὑπὸ ΑΒΔ γωνίᾳ than, equal to, or less than (angle) BAD.
ἴση ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΑΕ, καὶ διήχθω ἡ ΔΒ ἐπὶ τὸ Ε, καὶ ἐπεζεύχθω First of all, let it be greater. And let (angle) BAE,
ἡ ΕΓ. ἐπεὶ οὖν ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΒΕ γωνία τῇ ὑπὸ ΒΑΕ, equal to angle ABD, have been constructed on the
ἴση ἄρα ἐστὶ καὶ ἡ ΕΒ εὐθεῖα τῇ ΕΑ. καὶ ἐπεὶ ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ straight-line BA, at the point A on it [Prop. 1.23]. And
ΑΔ τῇ ΔΓ, κοινὴ δὲ ἡ ΔΕ, δύο δὴ αἱ ΑΔ, ΔΕ δύο ταῖς let DB have been drawn through to E, and let EC have
ΓΔ, ΔΕ ἴσαι εἰσὶν ἑκατέρα ἑκατέρᾳ· καὶ γωνία ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΔΕ been joined. Therefore, since angle ABE is equal to
γωνίᾳ τῇ ὑπὸ ΓΔΕ ἐστιν ἴση· ὀρθὴ γὰρ ἑκατέρα· βάσις ἄρα BAE, the straight-line EB is thus also equal to EA
ἡ ΑΕ βάσει τῇ ΓΕ ἐστιν ἴση. ἀλλὰ ἡ ΑΕ τῇ ΒΕ ἐδείχθη [Prop. 1.6]. And since AD is equal to DC, and DE (is)
ἴση· καὶ ἡ ΒΕ ἄρα τῇ ΓΕ ἐστιν ἴση· αἱ τρεῖς ἄρα αἱ ΑΕ, ΕΒ, common, the two (straight-lines) AD, DE are equal to
ΕΓ ἴσαι ἀλλήλαις εἰσίν· ὁ ἄρα κέντρῷ τῷ Ε διαστήματι δὲ the two (straight-lines) CD, DE, respectively. And angle
ἑνὶ τῶν ΑΕ, ΕΒ, ΕΓ κύκλος γραφόμενος ἥξει καὶ διὰ τῶν ADE is equal to angle CDE. For each (is) a right-angle.
λοιπῶν σημείων καὶ ἔσται προσαναγεγραμμένος. κύκλου Thus, the base AE is equal to the base CE [Prop. 1.4].
ἄρα τμήματος δοθέντος προσαναγέγραπται ὁ κύκλος. καὶ But, AE was shown (to be) equal to BE. Thus, BE is
δῆλον, ὡς τὸ ΑΒΓ τμῆμα ἔλαττόν ἐστιν ἡμικυκλίου διὰ τὸ also equal to CE. Thus, the three (straight-lines) AE,
τὸ Ε κέντρον ἐκτὸς αὐτοῦ τυγχάνειν. EB, and EC are equal to one another. Thus, if a cir-
῾Ομοίως [δὲ] κἂν ᾖ ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΒΔ γωνία ἴση τῇ ὑπὸ ΒΑΔ, cle is drawn with center E, and radius one of AE, EB,
τῆς ΑΔ ἴσης γενομένης ἑκατέρᾳ τῶν ΒΔ, ΔΓ αἱ τρεῖς αἱ or EC, it will also go through the remaining points (of
ΔΑ, ΔΒ, ΔΓ ἴσαι ἀλλήλαις ἔσονται, καὶ ἔσται τὸ Δ κέντρον the segment), and the (associated circle) will have been
τοῦ προσαναπεπληρωμένου κύκλου, καὶ δηλαδὴ ἔσται τὸ completed [Prop. 3.9]. Thus, a circle has been completed
ΑΒΓ ἡμικύκλιον. from the given segment of a circle. And (it is) clear that
᾿Εὰν δὲ ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΒΔ ἐλάττων ᾖ τῆς ὑπὸ ΒΑΔ, καὶ συ- the segment ABC is less than a semi-circle, because the
στησώμεθα πρὸς τῇ ΒΑ εὐθείᾳ καὶ τῷ πρὸς αὐτῇ σημείῳ center E happens to lie outside it.
94
STOIQEIWN gþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 3
τῷ Α τῇ ὑπὸ ΑΒΔ γωνίᾳ ἴσην, ἐντὸς τοῦ ΑΒΓ τμήματος [And], similarly, even if angle ABD is equal to BAD,
πεσεῖται τὸ κέντρον ἐπὶ τῆς ΔΒ, καὶ ἔσται δηλαδὴ τὸ ΑΒΓ (since) AD becomes equal to each of BD [Prop. 1.6] and
τμῆμα μεῖζον ἡμικυκλίου. DC, the three (straight-lines) DA, DB, and DC will be
Κύκλου ἄρα τμήματος δοθέντος προσαναγέγραπται ὁ equal to one another. And point D will be the center
κύκλος· ὅπερ ἔδει ποιῆσαι. of the completed circle. And ABC will manifestly be a
semi-circle.
And if ABD is less than BAD, and we construct (angle BAE), equal to angle ABD, on the straight-line BA,
at the point A on it [Prop. 1.23], then the center will fall
on DB, inside the segment ABC. And segment ABC will
manifestly be greater than a semi-circle.
Thus, a circle has been completed from the given segment of a circle. (Which is) the very thing it was required
to do.
kþ. Proposition 26
᾿Εν τοῖς ἴσοις κύκλοις αἱ ἴσαι γωνίαι ἐπὶ ἴσων περιφε- In equal circles, equal angles stand upon equal cirρειῶν βεβήκασιν, ἐάν τε πρὸς τοῖς κέντροις ἐάν τε πρὸς cumferences whether they are standing at the center or
ταῖς περιφερείαις ὦσι βεβηκυῖαι. at the circumference.
Γ
Η
∆
Κ Λ
Β
Α
Ε
Θ
Ζ
A
G
C
K
H
D
F
L
B E
῎Εστωσαν ἴσοι κύκλοι οἱ ΑΒΓ, ΔΕΖ καὶ ἐν αὐτοῖς ἴσαι Let ABC and DEF be equal circles, and within them
γωνίαι ἔστωσαν πρὸς μὲν τοῖς κέντροις αἱ ὑπὸ ΒΗΓ, ΕΘΖ, let BGC and EHF be equal angles at the center, and
πρὸς δὲ ταῖς περιφερείαις αἱ ὑπὸ ΒΑΓ, ΕΔΖ· λέγω, ὅτι ἴση BAC and EDF (equal angles) at the circumference. I
ἐστὶν ἡ ΒΚΓ περιφέρεια τῇ ΕΛΖ περιφερείᾳ. say that circumference BKC is equal to circumference
᾿Επεζεύχθωσαν γὰρ αἱ ΒΓ, ΕΖ. ELF.
Καὶ ἐπεὶ ἴσοι εἰσὶν οἱ ΑΒΓ, ΔΕΖ κύκλοι, ἴσαι εἰσὶν αἱ For let BC and EF have been joined.
ἐκ τῶν κέντρων· δύο δὴ αἱ ΒΗ, ΗΓ δύο ταῖς ΕΘ, ΘΖ ἴσαι· And since circles ABC and DEF are equal, their radii
καὶ γωνία ἡ πρὸς τῷ Η γωνίᾳ τῇ πρὸς τῷ Θ ἴση· βάσις ἄρα are equal. So the two (straight-lines) BG, GC (are) equal
ἡ ΒΓ βάσει τῇ ΕΖ ἐστιν ἴση. καὶ ἐπεὶ ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ πρὸς τῷ to the two (straight-lines) EH, HF (respectively). And
Α γωνία τῇ πρὸς τῷ Δ, ὅμοιον ἄρα ἐστὶ τὸ ΒΑΓ τμῆμα τῷ the angle at G (is) equal to the angle at H. Thus, the base
ΕΔΖ τμήματι· καί εἰσιν ἐπὶ ἴσων εὐθειῶν [τῶν ΒΓ, ΕΖ]· τὰ BC is equal to the base EF [Prop. 1.4]. And since the
δὲ ἐπὶ ἴσων εὐθειῶν ὅμοια τμήματα κύκλων ἴσα ἀλλήλοις angle at A is equal to the (angle) at D, the segment BAC
ἐστίν· ἴσον ἄρα τὸ ΒΑΓ τμῆμα τῷ ΕΔΖ. ἔστι δὲ καὶ ὅλος ὁ is thus similar to the segment EDF [Def. 3.11]. And
ΑΒΓ κύκλος ὅλῳ τῷ ΔΕΖ κύκλῳ ἴσος· λοιπὴ ἄρα ἡ ΒΚΓ they are on equal straight-lines [BC and EF]. And simiπεριφέρεια τῇ ΕΛΖ περιφερείᾳ ἐστὶν ἴση. lar segments of circles on equal straight-lines are equal to
᾿Εν ἄρα τοῖς ἴσοις κύκλοις αἱ ἴσαι γωνίαι ἐπὶ ἴσων περι- one another [Prop. 3.24]. Thus, segment BAC is equal to
φερειῶν βεβήκασιν, ἐάν τε πρὸς τοῖς κέντροις ἐάν τε πρὸς (segment) EDF. And the whole circle ABC is also equal
ταῖς περιφερείας ὦσι βεβηκυῖαι· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. to the whole circle DEF. Thus, the remaining circumference BKC is equal to the (remaining) circumference
ELF.
Thus, in equal circles, equal angles stand upon equal
circumferences, whether they are standing at the center
95
STOIQEIWN gþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 3
or at the circumference. (Which is) the very thing which
it was required to show.
kzþ. Proposition 27
᾿Εν τοῖς ἴσοις κύκλοις αἱ ἐπὶ ἴσων περιφερειῶν βεβηκυῖαι In equal circles, angles standing upon equal circumγωνίαι ἴσαι ἀλλήλαις εἰσίν, ἐάν τε πρὸς τοῖς κέντροις ἐάν τε ferences are equal to one another, whether they are
πρὸς ταῖς περιφερείαις ὦσι βεβηκυῖαι. standing at the center or at the circumference.
∆
Η
Κ
Γ Ζ
Θ
Β Ε
Α A
G
C
K
D
H
B E F
᾿Εν γὰρ ἴσοις κύκλοις τοῖς ΑΒΓ, ΔΕΖ ἐπὶ ἴσων περι- For let the angles BGC and EHF at the centers G
φερειῶν τῶν ΒΓ, ΕΖ πρὸς μὲν τοῖς Η, Θ κέντροις γωνίαι and H, and the (angles) BAC and EDF at the circumβεβηκέτωσαν αἱ ὑπὸ ΒΗΓ, ΕΘΖ, πρὸς δὲ ταῖς περιφερείαις ferences, stand upon the equal circumferences BC and
αἱ ὑπὸ ΒΑΓ, ΕΔΖ· λέγω, ὅτι ἡ μὲν ὑπὸ ΒΗΓ γωνία τῇ ὑπὸ EF, in the equal circles ABC and DEF (respectively). I
ΕΘΖ ἐστιν ἴση, ἡ δὲ ὑπὸ ΒΑΓ τῇ ὑπὸ ΕΔΖ ἐστιν ἴση. say that angle BGC is equal to (angle) EHF, and BAC
Εἰ γὰρ ἄνισός ἐστιν ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΗΓ τῇ ὑπὸ ΕΘΖ, μία αὐτῶν is equal to EDF.
μείζων ἐστίν. ἔστω μείζων ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΗΓ, καὶ συνεστάτω For if BGC is unequal to EHF, one of them is greater.
πρὸς τῇ ΒΗ εὐθείᾳ καὶ τῷ πρὸς αὐτῇ σημείῳ τῷ Η τῇ ὑπὸ Let BGC be greater, and let the (angle) BGK, equal to
ΕΘΖ γωνίᾳ ἴση ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΗΚ· αἱ δὲ ἴσαι γωνίαι ἐπὶ ἴσων angle EHF, have been constructed on the straight-line
περιφερειῶν βεβήκασιν, ὅταν πρὸς τοῖς κέντροις ὦσιν· ἴση BG, at the point G on it [Prop. 1.23]. But equal angles
ἄρα ἡ ΒΚ περιφέρεια τῇ ΕΖ περιφερείᾳ. ἀλλὰ ἡ ΕΖ τῇ ΒΓ (in equal circles) stand upon equal circumferences, when
ἐστιν ἴση· καὶ ἡ ΒΚ ἄρα τῇ ΒΓ ἐστιν ἴση ἡ ἐλάττων τῇ they are at the centers [Prop. 3.26]. Thus, circumference
μείζονι· ὅπερ ἐστὶν ἀδύνατον. οὐκ ἄρα ἄνισός ἐστιν ἡ ὑπὸ BK (is) equal to circumference EF. But, EF is equal
ΒΗΓ γωνία τῇ ὑπὸ ΕΘΖ· ἴση ἄρα. καί ἐστι τῆς μὲν ὑπὸ to BC. Thus, BK is also equal to BC, the lesser to the
ΒΗΓ ἡμίσεια ἡ πρὸς τῷ Α, τῆς δὲ ὑπὸ ΕΘΖ ἡμίσεια ἡ πρὸς greater. The very thing is impossible. Thus, angle BGC
τῷ Δ· ἴση ἄρα καὶ ἡ πρὸς τῷ Α γωνία τῇ πρὸς τῷ Δ. is not unequal to EHF. Thus, (it is) equal. And the
᾿Εν ἄρα τοῖς ἴσοις κύκλοις αἱ ἐπὶ ἴσων περιφερειῶν βε- (angle) at A is half BGC, and the (angle) at D half EHF
βηκυῖαι γωνίαι ἴσαι ἀλλήλαις εἰσίν, ἐάν τε πρὸς τοῖς κέντροις [Prop. 3.20]. Thus, the angle at A (is) also equal to the
ἐάν τε πρὸς ταῖς περιφερείαις ὦσι βεβηκυῖαι· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. (angle) at D.
Thus, in equal circles, angles standing upon equal circumferences are equal to one another, whether they are
standing at the center or at the circumference. (Which is)
the very thing it was required to show.
khþ. Proposition 28
᾿Εν τοῖς ἴσοις κύκλοις αἱ ἴσαι εὐθεῖαι ἴσας περιφερείας In equal circles, equal straight-lines cut off equal cirἀφαιροῦσι τὴν μὲν μείζονα τῇ μείζονι τὴν δὲ ἐλάττονα τῇ cumferences, the greater (circumference being equal) to
ἐλάττονι. the greater, and the lesser to the lesser.
῎Εστωσαν ἴσοι κύκλοι οἱ ΑΒΓ, ΔΕΖ, καὶ ἐν τοῖς κύκλοις Let ABC and DEF be equal circles, and let AB
ἴσαι εὐθεῖαι ἔστωσαν αἱ ΑΒ, ΔΕ τὰς μὲν ΑΓΒ, ΑΖΕ περι- and DE be equal straight-lines in these circles, cutting
φερείας μείζονας ἀφαιροῦσαι τὰς δὲ ΑΗΒ, ΔΘΕ ἐλάττονας· off the greater circumferences ACB and DFE, and the
λέγω, ὅτι ἡ μὲν ΑΓΒ μείζων περιφέρεια ἴση ἐστὶ τῇ ΔΖΕ lesser (circumferences) AGB and DHE (respectively). I
μείζονι περιφερείᾳ ἡ δὲ ΑΗΒ ἐλάττων περιφέρεια τῇ ΔΘΕ. say that the greater circumference ACB is equal to the
greater circumference DFE, and the lesser circumfer96
STOIQEIWN gþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 3
ence AGB to (the lesser) DHE.
Α
Κ
Γ
Λ
Ζ
Η Θ
Β ∆ Ε
F
A
K
C
B
G
D
L
H
E
Εἰλήφθω γὰρ τὰ κέντρα τῶν κύκλων τὰ Κ, Λ, καὶ For let the centers of the circles, K and L, have been
ἐπεζεύχθωσαν αἱ ΑΚ, ΚΒ, ΔΛ, ΛΕ. found [Prop. 3.1], and let AK, KB, DL, and LE have
Καὶ ἐπεὶ ἴσοι κύκλοι εἰσίν, ἴσαι εἰσὶ καὶ αἱ ἐκ τῶν been joined.
κέντρων· δύο δὴ αἱ ΑΚ, ΚΒ δυσὶ ταῖς ΔΛ, ΛΕ ἴσαι εἰσίν· And since (ABC and DEF) are equal circles, their
καὶ βάσις ἡ ΑΒ βάσει τῇ ΔΕ ἴση· γωνία ἄρα ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΚΒ radii are also equal [Def. 3.1]. So the two (straightγωνίᾳ τῇ ὑπὸ ΔΛΕ ἴση ἐστίν. αἱ δὲ ἴσαι γωνίαι ἐπὶ ἴσων lines) AK, KB are equal to the two (straight-lines) DL,
περιφερειῶν βεβήκασιν, ὅταν πρὸς τοῖς κέντροις ὦσιν· ἴση LE (respectively). And the base AB (is) equal to the
ἄρα ἡ ΑΗΒ περιφέρεια τῇ ΔΘΕ. ἐστὶ δὲ καὶ ὅλος ὁ ΑΒΓ base DE. Thus, angle AKB is equal to angle DLE
κύκλος ὅλῳ τῷ ΔΕΖ κύκλῳ ἴσος· καὶ λοιπὴ ἄρα ἡ ΑΓΒ [Prop. 1.8]. And equal angles stand upon equal circumπεριφέρεια λοιπῇ τῇ ΔΖΕ περιφερείᾳ ἴση ἐστίν. ferences, when they are at the centers [Prop. 3.26]. Thus,
᾿Εν ἄρα τοῖς ἴσοις κύκλοις αἱ ἴσαι εὐθεῖαι ἴσας πε- circumference AGB (is) equal to DHE. And the whole
ριφερείας ἀφαιροῦσι τὴν μὲν μείζονα τῇ μείζονι τὴν δὲ circle ABC is also equal to the whole circle DEF. Thus,
ἐλάττονα τῇ ἐλάττονι· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. the remaining circumference ACB is also equal to the
remaining circumference DFE.
Thus, in equal circles, equal straight-lines cut off
equal circumferences, the greater (circumference being
equal) to the greater, and the lesser to the lesser. (Which
is) the very thing it was required to show.
kjþ. Proposition 29
᾿Εν τοῖς ἴσοις κύκλοις τὰς ἴσας περιφερείας ἴσαι εὐθεῖαι In equal circles, equal straight-lines subtend equal cirὑποτείνουσιν. cumferences.
Γ
Κ Λ
Α ∆
Η Θ
Β Ε Ζ E
A
K
B
G
D
L
H
C F
῎Εστωσαν ἴσοι κύκλοι οἱ ΑΒΓ, ΔΕΖ, καὶ ἐν αὐτοῖς ἴσαι Let ABC and DEF be equal circles, and within them
περιφέρειαι ἀπειλήφθωσαν αἱ ΒΗΓ, ΕΘΖ, καὶ ἐπεζεύχθωσαν let the equal circumferences BGC and EHF have been
αἱ ΒΓ, ΕΖ εὐθεῖαι· λέγω, ὅτι ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ΒΓ τῇ ΕΖ. cut off. And let the straight-lines BC and EF have been
Εἰλήφθω γὰρ τὰ κέντρα τῶν κύκλων, καὶ ἔστω τὰ Κ, joined. I say that BC is equal to EF.
Λ, καὶ ἐπεζεύχθωσαν αἱ ΒΚ, ΚΓ, ΕΛ, ΛΖ. For let the centers of the circles have been found
Καὶ ἐπεὶ ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ΒΗΓ περιφέρεια τῇ ΕΘΖ περιφερείᾳ, [Prop. 3.1], and let them be (at) K and L. And let BK,
97
STOIQEIWN gþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 3
ἴση ἐστὶ καὶ γωνία ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΚΓ τῇ ὑπὸ ΕΛΖ. καὶ ἐπεὶ ἴσοι KC, EL, and LF have been joined.
εἰσὶν οἱ ΑΒΓ, ΔΕΖ κύκλοι, ἴσαι εἰσὶ καὶ αἱ ἐκ τῶν κέντρων· And since the circumference BGC is equal to the cirδύο δὴ αἱ ΒΚ, ΚΓ δυσὶ ταῖς ΕΛ, ΛΖ ἴσαι εἰσίν· καὶ γωνίας cumference EHF, the angle BKC is also equal to (anἴσας περιέχουσιν· βάσις ἄρα ἡ ΒΓ βάσει τῇ ΕΖ ἴση ἐστίν· gle) ELF [Prop. 3.27]. And since the circles ABC and
᾿Εν ἄρα τοῖς ἴσοις κύκλοις τὰς ἴσας περιφερείας ἴσαι DEF are equal, their radii are also equal [Def. 3.1]. So
εὐθεῖαι ὑποτείνουσιν· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. the two (straight-lines) BK, KC are equal to the two
(straight-lines) EL, LF (respectively). And they contain
equal angles. Thus, the base BC is equal to the base EF
[Prop. 1.4].
Thus, in equal circles, equal straight-lines subtend
equal circumferences. (Which is) the very thing it was
required to show.
lþ. Proposition 30
Τὴν δοθεῖσαν περιφέρειαν δίχα τεμεῖν. To cut a given circumference in half.
Α Β
∆
Γ
D
A B C
῎Εστω ἡ δοθεῖσα περιφέρεια ἡ ΑΔΒ· δεῖ δὴ τὴν ΑΔΒ Let ADB be the given circumference. So it is required
περιφέρειαν δίχα τεμεῖν. to cut circumference ADB in half.
᾿Επεζεύχθω ἡ ΑΒ, καὶ τετμήσθω δίχα κατὰ τὸ Γ, καὶ Let AB have been joined, and let it have been cut in
ἀπὸ τοῦ Γ σημείου τῇ ΑΒ εὐθείᾳ πρὸς ὀρθὰς ἤχθω ἡ ΓΔ, half at (point) C [Prop. 1.10]. And let CD have been
καὶ ἐπεζεύχθωσαν αἱ ΑΔ, ΔΒ. drawn from point C, at right-angles to AB [Prop. 1.11].
Καὶ ἐπεὶ ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ΑΓ τῇ ΓΒ, κοινὴ δὲ ἡ ΓΔ, δύο And let AD, and DB have been joined.
δὴ αἱ ΑΓ, ΓΔ δυσὶ ταῖς ΒΓ, ΓΔ ἴσαι εἰσίν· καὶ γωνία ἡ And since AC is equal to CB, and CD (is) comὑπὸ ΑΓΔ γωνίᾳ τῇ ὑπὸ ΒΓΔ ἴση· ὀρθὴ γὰρ ἑκατέρα· βάσις mon, the two (straight-lines) AC, CD are equal to the
ἄρα ἡ ΑΔ βάσει τῇ ΔΒ ἴση ἐστίν. αἱ δὲ ἴσαι εὐθεῖαι ἴσας two (straight-lines) BC, CD (respectively). And angle
περιφερείας ἀφαιροῦσι τὴν μὲν μείζονα τῇ μείζονι τὴν δὲ ACD (is) equal to angle BCD. For (they are) each rightἐλάττονα τῇ ἐλάττονι· κάι ἐστιν ἑκατέρα τῶν ΑΔ, ΔΒ πε- angles. Thus, the base AD is equal to the base DB
ριφερειῶν ἐλάττων ἡμικυκλίου· ἴση ἄρα ἡ ΑΔ περιφέρεια τῇ [Prop. 1.4]. And equal straight-lines cut off equal circumΔΒ περιφερείᾳ. ferences, the greater (circumference being equal) to the
῾Η ἄρα δοθεῖσα περιφέρεια δίχα τέτμηται κατὰ τὸ Δ greater, and the lesser to the lesser [Prop. 1.28]. And the
σημεῖον· ὅπερ ἔδει ποιῆσαι. circumferences AD and DB are each less than a semicircle. Thus, circumference AD (is) equal to circumference DB.
Thus, the given circumference has been cut in half at
point D. (Which is) the very thing it was required to do.
laþ. Proposition 31
᾿Εν κύκλῳ ἡ μὲν ἐν τῷ ἡμικυκλίῳ γωνία ὀρθή ἐστιν, ἡ δὲ In a circle, the angle in a semi-circle is a right-angle,
ἐν τῷ μείζονι τμήματι ἐλάττων ὀρθῆς, ἡ δὲ ἐν τῷ ἐλάττονι and that in a greater segment (is) less than a right-angle,
τμήματι μείζων ὀρθῆς· καὶ ἔπι ἡ μὲν τοῦ μείζονος τμήματος and that in a lesser segment (is) greater than a rightγωνία μείζων ἐστὶν ὀρθῆς, ἡ δὲ τοῦ ἐλάττονος τμήματος angle. And, further, the angle of a segment greater (than
γωνία ἐλάττων ὀρθῆς. a semi-circle) is greater than a right-angle, and the an98
STOIQEIWN gþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 3
gle of a segment less (than a semi-circle) is less than a
right-angle.
Β
Γ
Ε
Α
Ζ
∆
A
D
B
E
C
F
῎Εστω κύκλος ὁ ΑΒΓΔ, διάμετρος δὲ αὐτοῦ ἔστω ἡ ΒΓ, Let ABCD be a circle, and let BC be its diameter, and
κέντρον δὲ τὸ Ε, καὶ ἐπεζεύχθωσαν αἱ ΒΑ, ΑΓ, ΑΔ, ΔΓ· E its center. And let BA, AC, AD, and DC have been
λέγω, ὅτι ἡ μὲν ἐν τῷ ΒΑΓ ἡμικυκλίῳ γωνία ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΑΓ joined. I say that the angle BAC in the semi-circle BAC
ὀρθή ἐστιν, ἡ δὲ ἐν τῷ ΑΒΓ μείζονι τοῦ ἡμικυκλίου τμήματι is a right-angle, and the angle ABC in the segment ABC,
γωνία ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΒΓ ἐλάττων ἐστὶν ὀρθῆς, ἡ δὲ ἐν τῷ ΑΔΓ (which is) greater than a semi-circle, is less than a rightἐλάττονι τοῦ ἡμικυκλίου τμήματι γωνία ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΔΓ μείζων angle, and the angle ADC in the segment ADC, (which
ἐστὶν ὀρθῆς. is) less than a semi-circle, is greater than a right-angle.
᾿Επεζεύχθω ἡ ΑΕ, καὶ διήχθω ἡ ΒΑ ἐπὶ τὸ Ζ. Let AE have been joined, and let BA have been
Καὶ ἐπεὶ ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ΒΕ τῇ ΕΑ, ἴση ἐστὶ καὶ γωνία ἡ drawn through to F.
ὑπὸ ΑΒΕ τῇ ὑπὸ ΒΑΕ. πάλιν, ἐπεὶ ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ΓΕ τῇ ΕΑ, And since BE is equal to EA, angle ABE is also
ἴση ἐστὶ καὶ ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΓΕ τῇ ὑπὸ ΓΑΕ· ὅλη ἄρα ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΑΓ equal to BAE [Prop. 1.5]. Again, since CE is equal to
δυσὶ ταῖς ὑπὸ ΑΒΓ, ΑΓΒ ἴση ἐστίν. ἐστὶ δὲ καὶ ἡ ὑπὸ ΖΑΓ EA, ACE is also equal to CAE [Prop. 1.5]. Thus, the
ἐκτὸς τοῦ ΑΒΓ τριγώνου δυσὶ ταῖς ὑπὸ ΑΒΓ, ΑΓΒ γωνίαις whole (angle) BAC is equal to the two (angles) ABC
ἴση· ἴση ἄρα καὶ ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΑΓ γωνία τῇ ὑπὸ ΖΑΓ· ὀρθὴ ἄρα and ACB. And FAC, (which is) external to triangle
ἑκατέρα· ἡ ἄρα ἐν τῷ ΒΑΓ ἡμικυκλίῳ γωνία ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΑΓ ABC, is also equal to the two angles ABC and ACB
ὀρθή ἐστιν. [Prop. 1.32]. Thus, angle BAC (is) also equal to FAC.
Καὶ ἐπεὶ τοῦ ΑΒΓ τρίγωνου δύο γωνίαι αἱ ὑπὸ ΑΒΓ, Thus, (they are) each right-angles. [Def. 1.10]. Thus, the
ΒΑΓ δύο ὀρθῶν ἐλάττονές εἰσιν, ὀρθὴ δὲ ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΑΓ, angle BAC in the semi-circle BAC is a right-angle.
ἐλάττων ἄρα ὀρθῆς ἐστιν ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΒΓ γωνία· καί ἐστιν ἐν And since the two angles ABC and BAC of trianτῷ ΑΒΓ μείζονι τοῦ ἡμικυκλίου τμήματι. gle ABC are less than two right-angles [Prop. 1.17], and
Καὶ ἐπεὶ ἐν κύκλῳ τετράπλευρόν ἐστι τὸ ΑΒΓΔ, τῶν δὲ BAC is a right-angle, angle ABC is thus less than a rightἐν τοῖς κύκλοις τετραπλεύρων αἱ ἀπεναντίον γωνίαι δυσὶν angle. And it is in segment ABC, (which is) greater than
ὀρθαῖς ἴσαι εἰσίν [αἱ ἄρα ὑπὸ ΑΒΓ, ΑΔΓ γωνίαι δυσὶν ὀρθαῖς a semi-circle.
ἴσας εἰσίν], καί ἐστιν ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΒΓ ἐλάττων ὀρθῆς· λοιπὴ ἄρα And since ABCD is a quadrilateral within a circle,
ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΔΓ γωνία μείζων ὀρθῆς ἐστιν· καί ἐστιν ἐν τῷ ΑΔΓ and for quadrilaterals within circles the (sum of the) opἐλάττονι τοῦ ἡμικυκλίου τμήματι. posite angles is equal to two right-angles [Prop. 3.22]
Λέγω, ὅτι καὶ ἡ μὲν τοῦ μείζονος τμήματος γωνία ἡ πε- [angles ABC and ADC are thus equal to two rightριεχομένη ὑπό [τε] τῆς ΑΒΓ περιφερείας καὶ τῆς ΑΓ εὐθείας angles], and (angle) ABC is less than a right-angle. The
μείζων ἐστὶν ὀρθῆς, ἡ δὲ τοῦ ἐλάττονος τμήματος γωνία ἡ remaining angle ADC is thus greater than a right-angle.
περιεχομένη ὑπό [τε] τῆς ΑΔ[Γ] περιφερείας καὶ τῆς ΑΓ And it is in segment ADC, (which is) less than a semiεὐθείας ἐλάττων ἐστὶν ὀρθῆς. καί ἐστιν αὐτόθεν φανερόν. circle.
ἐπεὶ γὰρ ἡ ὑπὸ τῶν ΒΑ, ΑΓ εὐθειῶν ὀρθή ἐστιν, ἡ ἄρα I also say that the angle of the greater segment,
ὑπὸ τῆς ΑΒΓ περιφερείας καὶ τῆς ΑΓ εὐθείας περιεχομένη (namely) that contained by the circumference ABC and
μείζων ἐστὶν ὀρθῆς. πάλιν, ἐπεὶ ἡ ὑπὸ τῶν ΑΓ, ΑΖ εὐθειῶν the straight-line AC, is greater than a right-angle. And
ὀρθή ἐστιν, ἡ ἄρα ὑπὸ τῆς ΓΑ εὐθείας καὶ τῆς ΑΔ[Γ] περι- the angle of the lesser segment, (namely) that contained
99
STOIQEIWN gþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 3
φερείας περιεχομένη ἐλάττων ἐστὶν ὀρθῆς. by the circumference AD[C] and the straight-line AC, is
᾿Εν κύκλῳ ἄρα ἡ μὲν ἐν τῷ ἡμικυκλίῳ γωνία ὀρθή ἐστιν, less than a right-angle. And this is immediately apparent.
ἡ δὲ ἐν τῷ μείζονι τμήματι ἐλάττων ὀρθῆς, ἡ δὲ ἐν τῷ For since the (angle contained by) the two straight-lines
ἐλάττονι [τμήματι] μείζων ὀρθῆς· καὶ ἔπι ἡ μὲν τοῦ μείζονος BA and AC is a right-angle, the (angle) contained by
τμήματος [γωνία] μείζων [ἐστὶν] ὀρθῆς, ἡ δὲ τοῦ ἐλάττονος the circumference ABC and the straight-line AC is thus
τμήματος [γωνία] ἐλάττων ὀρθῆς· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. greater than a right-angle. Again, since the (angle contained by) the straight-lines AC and AF is a right-angle,
the (angle) contained by the circumference AD[C] and
the straight-line CA is thus less than a right-angle.
Thus, in a circle, the angle in a semi-circle is a rightangle, and that in a greater segment (is) less than a
right-angle, and that in a lesser [segment] (is) greater
than a right-angle. And, further, the [angle] of a segment greater (than a semi-circle) [is] greater than a rightangle, and the [angle] of a segment less (than a semicircle) is less than a right-angle. (Which is) the very thing
it was required to show.
lbþ. Proposition 32
᾿Εὰν κύκλου ἐφάπτηταί τις εὐθεῖα, ἀπὸ δὲ τῆς ἁφῆς εἰς If some straight-line touches a circle, and some
τὸν κύκλον διαχθῇ τις εὐθεῖα τέμνουσα τὸν κύκλον, ἃς (other) straight-line is drawn across, from the point of
ποιεῖ γωνίας πρὸς τῇ ἐφαπτομένῃ, ἴσαι ἔσονται ταῖς ἐν τοῖς contact into the circle, cutting the circle (in two), then
ἐναλλὰξ τοῦ κύκλου τμήμασι γωνίαις. those angles the (straight-line) makes with the tangent
will be equal to the angles in the alternate segments of
the circle.
A
E
B
F
D
C
A
E
B
F
D
C
Κύκλου γὰρ τοῦ ΑΒΓΔ ἐφαπτέσθω τις εὐθεῖα ἡ ΕΖ For let some straight-line EF touch the circle ABCD
κατὰ τὸ Β σημεῖον, καὶ ἀπὸ τοῦ Β σημείου διήχθω τις at the point B, and let some (other) straight-line BD
εὐθεῖα εἰς τὸν ΑΒΓΔ κύκλον τέμνουσα αὐτὸν ἡ ΒΔ. λέγω, have been drawn from point B into the circle ABCD,
ὅτι ἃς ποιεῖ γωνίας ἡ ΒΔ μετὰ τῆς ΕΖ ἐφαπτομένης, ἴσας cutting it (in two). I say that the angles BD makes with
ἔσονται ταῖς ἐν τοῖς ἐναλλὰξ τμήμασι τοῦ κύκλου γωνίαις, the tangent EF will be equal to the angles in the alterτουτέστιν, ὅτι ἡ μὲν ὑπὸ ΖΒΔ γωνία ἴση ἐστὶ τῇ ἐν τῷ ΒΑΔ nate segments of the circle. That is to say, that angle
τμήματι συνισταμένῃ γωνίᾳ, ἡ δὲ ὑπὸ ΕΒΔ γωνία ἴση ἐστὶ FBD is equal to the angle constructed in segment BAD,
τῇ ἐν τῷ ΔΓΒ τμήματι συνισταμένῃ γωνίᾳ. and angle EBD is equal to the angle constructed in seg-
῎Ηχθω γὰρ ἀπὸ τοῦ Β τῇ ΕΖ πρὸς ὀρθὰς ἡ ΒΑ, καὶ ment DCB.
εἰλήφθω ἐπὶ τῆς ΒΔ περιφερείας τυχὸν σημεῖον τὸ Γ, καὶ For let BA have been drawn from B, at right-angles
ἐπεζεύχθωσαν αἱ ΑΔ, ΔΓ, ΓΒ. to EF [Prop. 1.11]. And let the point C have been taken
Καὶ ἐπεὶ κύκλου τοῦ ΑΒΓΔ ἐφάπτεταί τις εὐθεῖα ἡ ΕΖ at random on the circumference BD. And let AD, DC,
100
STOIQEIWN gþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 3
κατὰ τὸ Β, καὶ ἀπὸ τῆς ἁφῆς ἦκται τῇ ἐφαπτομένῃ πρὸς and CB have been joined.
ὀρθὰς ἡ ΒΑ, ἐπὶ τῆς ΒΑ ἄρα τὸ κέντρον ἐστὶ τοῦ ΑΒΓΔ And since some straight-line EF touches the circle
κύκλου. ἡ ΒΑ ἄρα διάμετός ἐστι τοῦ ΑΒΓΔ κύκλου· ἡ ἄρα ABCD at point B, and BA has been drawn from the
ὑπὸ ΑΔΒ γωνία ἐν ἡμικυκλίῳ οὖσα ὀρθή ἐστιν. λοιπαὶ ἄρα point of contact, at right-angles to the tangent, the center
αἱ ὑπὸ ΒΑΔ, ΑΒΔ μιᾷ ὀρθῇ ἴσαι εἰσίν. ἐστὶ δὲ καὶ ἡ ὑπὸ of circle ABCD is thus on BA [Prop. 3.19]. Thus, BA
ΑΒΖ ὀρθή· ἡ ἄρα ὑπὸ ΑΒΖ ἴση ἐστὶ ταῖς ὑπὸ ΒΑΔ, ΑΒΔ. is a diameter of circle ABCD. Thus, angle ADB, being
κοινὴ ἀφῃρήσθω ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΒΔ· λοιπὴ ἄρα ἡ ὑπὸ ΔΒΖ γωνία in a semi-circle, is a right-angle [Prop. 3.31]. Thus, the
ἴση ἐστὶ τῇ ἐν τῷ ἐναλλὰξ τμήματι τοῦ κύκλου γωνίᾳ τῇ remaining angles (of triangle ADB) BAD and ABD are
ὑπὸ ΒΑΔ. καὶ ἐπεὶ ἐν κύκλῳ τετράπλευρόν ἐστι τὸ ΑΒΓΔ, equal to one right-angle [Prop. 1.32]. And ABF is also a
αἱ ἀπεναντίον αὐτοῦ γωνίαι δυσὶν ὀρθαῖς ἴσαι εἰσίν. εἰσὶ δὲ right-angle. Thus, ABF is equal to BAD and ABD. Let
καὶ αἱ ὑπὸ ΔΒΖ, ΔΒΕ δυσὶν ὀρθαῖς ἴσαι· αἱ ἄρα ὑπὸ ΔΒΖ, ABD have been subtracted from both. Thus, the remainΔΒΕ ταῖς ὑπὸ ΒΑΔ, ΒΓΔ ἴσαι εἰσίν, ὧν ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΑΔ τῇ ὑπὸ ing angle DBF is equal to the angle BAD in the alternate
ΔΒΖ ἐδείχθη ἴση· λοιπὴ ἄρα ἡ ὑπὸ ΔΒΕ τῇ ἐν τῷ ἐναλλὰξ segment of the circle. And since ABCD is a quadrilateral
τοῦ κύκλου τμήματι τῷ ΔΓΒ τῇ ὑπὸ ΔΓΒ γωνίᾳ ἐστὶν ἴση. in a circle, (the sum of) its opposite angles is equal to
᾿Εὰν ἄρα κύκλου ἐφάπτηταί τις εὐθεῖα, ἀπὸ δὲ τῆς ἁφῆς two right-angles [Prop. 3.22]. And DBF and DBE is
εἰς τὸν κύκλον διαχθῇ τις εὐθεῖα τέμνουσα τὸν κύκλον, ἃς also equal to two right-angles [Prop. 1.13]. Thus, DBF
ποιεῖ γωνίας πρὸς τῇ ἐφαπτομένῃ, ἴσαι ἔσονται ταῖς ἐν τοῖς and DBE is equal to BAD and BCD, of which BAD
ἐναλλὰξ τοῦ κύκλου τμήμασι γωνίαις· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. was shown (to be) equal to DBF. Thus, the remaining
(angle) DBE is equal to the angle DCB in the alternate
segment DCB of the circle.
Thus, if some straight-line touches a circle, and some
(other) straight-line is drawn across, from the point of
contact into the circle, cutting the circle (in two), then
those angles the (straight-line) makes with the tangent
will be equal to the angles in the alternate segments of
the circle. (Which is) the very thing it was required to
show.
lgþ. Proposition 33
᾿Επὶ τῆς δοθείσης εὐθείας γράψαι τμῆμα κύκλου δεχόμε- To draw a segment of a circle, accepting an angle
νον γωνίαν ἴσην τῇ δοθείσῃ γωνίᾳ εὐθυγράμμῳ. equal to a given rectilinear angle, on a given straight-line.
Ζ
Ε
Η
Α Α
Β
Ζ
Β
Ε
Η
∆
Α
Β
Γ Γ
Ε
∆ ∆
Ζ
Γ
Θ
H
A
C
A
G
F
B
E
F
A D
G
D
C C
F
E E
B
B
D
῎Εστω ἡ δοθεῖσα εὐθεῖα ἡ ΑΒ, ἡ δὲ δοθεῖσα γωνία Let AB be the given straight-line, and C the given
εὐθύγραμμος ἡ πρὸς τῷ Γ· δεῖ δὴ ἐπὶ τῆς δοθείσης εὐθείας rectilinear angle. So it is required to draw a segment
τῆς ΑΒ γράψαι τμῆμα κύκλου δεχόμενον γωνίαν ἴσην τῇ of a circle, accepting an angle equal to C, on the given
πρὸς τῷ Γ. straight-line AB.
῾Η δὴ πρὸς τῷ Γ [γωνία] ἤτοι ὀξεῖά ἐστιν ἢ ὀρθὴ ἢ So the [angle] C is surely either acute, a right-angle,
ἀμβλεῖα· ἔστω πρότερον ὀξεῖα, καὶ ὡς ἐπὶ τῆς πρώτης κα- or obtuse. First of all, let it be acute. And, as in the first
ταγραφῆς συνεστάτω πρὸς τῇ ΑΒ εὐθείᾳ καὶ τῷ Α σημείῳ diagram (from the left), let (angle) BAD, equal to angle
τῇ πρὸς τῷ Γ γωνίᾳ ἴση ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΑΔ· ὀξεῖα ἄρα ἐστὶ καὶ ἡ C, have been constructed on the straight-line AB, at the
ὑπὸ ΒΑΔ. ἤχθω τῇ ΔΑ πρὸς ὀρθὰς ἡ ΑΕ, καὶ τετμήσθω point A (on it) [Prop. 1.23]. Thus, BAD is also acute. Let
ἡ ΑΒ δίχα κατὰ τὸ Ζ, καὶ ἤχθω ἀπὸ τοῦ Ζ σημείου τῇ ΑΒ AE have been drawn, at right-angles to DA [Prop. 1.11].
101
STOIQEIWN gþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 3
πρὸς ὀρθὰς ἡ ΖΗ, καὶ ἐπεζεύχθω ἡ ΗΒ. And let AB have been cut in half at F [Prop. 1.10]. And
Καὶ ἐπεὶ ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ΑΖ τῇ ΖΒ, κοινὴ δὲ ἡ ΖΗ, δύο δὴ let FG have been drawn from point F, at right-angles to
αἱ ΑΖ, ΖΗ δύο ταῖς ΒΖ, ΖΗ ἴσαι εἰσίν· καὶ γωνία ἡ ὑπὸ AB [Prop. 1.11]. And let GB have been joined.
ΑΖΗ [γωνίᾳ] τῇ ὑπὸ ΒΖΗ ἴση· βάσις ἄρα ἡ ΑΗ βάσει τῇ And since AF is equal to FB, and FG (is) common,
ΒΗ ἴση ἐστίν. ὁ ἄρα κέντρῳ μὲν τῷ Η διαστήματι δὲ τῷ the two (straight-lines) AF, FG are equal to the two
ΗΑ κύκλος γραφόμενος ἥξει καὶ διὰ τοῦ Β. γεγράφθω καὶ (straight-lines) BF, FG (respectively). And angle AFG
ἔστω ὁ ΑΒΕ, καὶ ἐπεζεύχθω ἡ ΕΒ. ἐπεὶ οὖν ἀπ᾿ ἄκρας τῆς (is) equal to [angle] BFG. Thus, the base AG is equal to
ΑΕ διαμέτρου ἀπὸ τοῦ Α τῇ ΑΕ πρὸς ὀρθάς ἐστιν ἡ ΑΔ, the base BG [Prop. 1.4]. Thus, the circle drawn with
ἡ ΑΔ ἄρα ἐφάπτεται τοῦ ΑΒΕ κύκλου· ἐπεὶ οὖν κύκλου center G, and radius GA, will also go through B (as
τοῦ ΑΒΕ ἐφάπτεταί τις εὐθεῖα ἡ ΑΔ, καὶ ἀπὸ τῆς κατὰ τὸ well as A). Let it have been drawn, and let it be (deΑ ἁφῆς εἰς τὸν ΑΒΕ κύκλον διῆκταί τις εὐθεῖα ἡ ΑΒ, ἡ noted) ABE. And let EB have been joined. Therefore,
ἄρα ὑπὸ ΔΑΒ γωνία ἴση ἐστὶ τῇ ἐν τῷ ἐναλλὰξ τοῦ κύκλου since AD is at the extremity of diameter AE, (namely,
τμήματι γωνίᾳ τῇ ὑπὸ ΑΕΒ. ἀλλ᾿ ἡ ὑπὸ ΔΑΒ τῇ πρὸς τῷ Γ point) A, at right-angles to AE, the (straight-line) AD
ἐστιν ἴση· καὶ ἡ πρὸς τῷ Γ ἄρα γωνία ἴση ἐστὶ τῇ ὑπὸ ΑΕΒ. thus touches the circle ABE [Prop. 3.16 corr.]. There-
᾿Επὶ τῆς δοθείσης ἄρα εὐθείας τῆς ΑΒ τμῆμα κύκλου fore, since some straight-line AD touches the circle ABE,
γέγραπται τὸ ΑΕΒ δεχόμενον γωνίαν τὴν ὑπὸ ΑΕΒ ἴσην and some (other) straight-line AB has been drawn across
τῇ δοθείσῃ τῇ πρὸς τῷ Γ. from the point of contact A into circle ABE, angle DAB
᾿Αλλὰ δὴ ὀρθὴ ἔστω ἡ πρὸς τῷ Γ· καὶ δέον πάλιν ἔστω is thus equal to the angle AEB in the alternate segment
ἐπὶ τῆς ΑΒ γράψαι τμῆμα κύκλου δεχόμενον γωνίαν ἴσην τῇ of the circle [Prop. 3.32]. But, DAB is equal to C. Thus,
πρὸς τῷ Γ ὀρθῇ [γωνίᾳ]. συνεστάτω [πάλιν] τῇ πρὸς τῷ Γ angle C is also equal to AEB.
ὀρθῇ γωνίᾳ ἴση ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΑΔ, ὡς ἔχει ἐπὶ τῆς δευτέρας κατα- Thus, a segment AEB of a circle, accepting the angle
γραφῆς, καὶ τετμήσθω ἡ ΑΒ δίχα κατὰ τὸ Ζ, καὶ κέντρῳ τῷ AEB (which is) equal to the given (angle) C, has been
Ζ, διαστήματι δὲ ὁποτέρῳ τῶν ΖΑ, ΖΒ, κύκλος γεγράφθω drawn on the given straight-line AB.
ὁ ΑΕΒ. And so let C be a right-angle. And let it again be
᾿Εφάπτεται ἄρα ἡ ΑΔ εὐθεῖα τοῦ ΑΒΕ κύκλου διὰ τὸ necessary to draw a segment of a circle on AB, accepting
ὀρθὴν εἶναι τὴν πρὸς τῷ Α γωνίαν. καὶ ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ὑπὸ an angle equal to the right-[angle] C. Let the (angle)
ΒΑΔ γωνία τῇ ἐν τῷ ΑΕΒ τμήματι· ὀρθὴ γὰρ καὶ αὐτὴ ἐν BAD [again] have been constructed, equal to the rightἡμικυκλίῳ οὖσα. ἀλλὰ καὶ ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΑΔ τῇ πρὸς τῷ Γ ἴση angle C [Prop. 1.23], as in the second diagram (from the
ἐστίν. καὶ ἡ ἐν τῷ ΑΕΒ ἄρα ἴση ἐστὶ τῇ πρὸς τῷ Γ. left). And let AB have been cut in half at F [Prop. 1.10].
Γέγραπται ἄρα πάλιν ἐπὶ τῆς ΑΒ τμῆμα κύκλου τὸ ΑΕΒ And let the circle AEB have been drawn with center F,
δεχόμενον γωνίαν ἴσην τῇ πρὸς τῷ Γ. and radius either FA or FB.
᾿Αλλὰ δὴ ἡ πρὸς τῷ Γ ἀμβλεῖα ἔστω· καὶ συνεστάτω Thus, the straight-line AD touches the circle ABE, on
αὐτῇ ἴση πρὸς τῇ ΑΒ εὐθείᾳ καὶ τῷ Α σημείῳ ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΑΔ, account of the angle at A being a right-angle [Prop. 3.16
ὡς ἔχει ἐπὶ τῆς τρίτης καταγραφῆς, καὶ τῇ ΑΔ πρὸς ὀρθὰς corr.]. And angle BAD is equal to the angle in segment
ἤχθω ἡ ΑΕ, καὶ τετμήσθω πάλιν ἡ ΑΒ δίχα κατὰ τὸ Ζ, καὶ AEB. For (the latter angle), being in a semi-circle, is also
τῇ ΑΒ πρὸς ὀρθὰς ἤχθω ἡ ΖΗ, καὶ ἐπεζεύχθω ἡ ΗΒ. a right-angle [Prop. 3.31]. But, BAD is also equal to C.
Καὶ ἐπεὶ πάλιν ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ΑΖ τῇ ΖΒ, καὶ κοινὴ ἡ ΖΗ, Thus, the (angle) in (segment) AEB is also equal to C.
δύο δὴ αἱ ΑΖ, ΖΗ δύο ταῖς ΒΖ, ΖΗ ἴσαι εἰσίν· καὶ γωνία ἡ Thus, a segment AEB of a circle, accepting an angle
ὑπὸ ΑΖΗ γωνίᾳ τῇ ὑπὸ ΒΖΗ ἴση· βάσις ἄρα ἡ ΑΗ βάσει equal to C, has again been drawn on AB.
τῇ ΒΗ ἴση ἐστίν· ὁ ἄρα κέντρῳ μὲν τῷ Η διαστήματι δὲ τῷ And so let (angle) C be obtuse. And let (angle) BAD,
ΗΑ κύκλος γραφόμενος ἥξει καὶ διὰ τοῦ Β. ἐρχέσθω ὡς ὁ equal to (C), have been constructed on the straight-line
ΑΕΒ. καὶ ἐπεὶ τῇ ΑΕ διαμέτρῳ ἀπ᾿ ἄκρας πρὸς ὀρθάς ἐστιν AB, at the point A (on it) [Prop. 1.23], as in the third
ἡ ΑΔ, ἡ ΑΔ ἄρα ἐφάπτεται τοῦ ΑΕΒ κύκλου. καὶ ἀπὸ τῆς diagram (from the left). And let AE have been drawn, at
κατὰ τὸ Α ἐπαφῆς διῆκται ἡ ΑΒ· ἡ ἄρα ὑπὸ ΒΑΔ γωνία right-angles to AD [Prop. 1.11]. And let AB have again
ἴση ἐστὶ τῇ ἐν τῷ ἐναλλὰξ τοῦ κύκλου τμήματι τῷ ΑΘΒ been cut in half at F [Prop. 1.10]. And let FG have been
συνισταμένῃ γωνίᾳ. ἀλλ᾿ ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΑΔ γωνία τῇ πρὸς τῷ Γ drawn, at right-angles to AB [Prop. 1.10]. And let GB
ἴση ἐστίν. καὶ ἡ ἐν τῷ ΑΘΒ ἄρα τμήματι γωνία ἴση ἐστὶ τῇ have been joined.
πρὸς τῷ Γ. And again, since AF is equal to FB, and FG (is)
᾿Επὶ τῆς ἄρα δοθείσης εὐθείας τῆς ΑΒ γέγραπται τμῆμα common, the two (straight-lines) AF, FG are equal to
κύκλου τὸ ΑΘΒ δεχόμενον γωνίαν ἴσην τῇ πρὸς τῷ Γ· ὅπερ the two (straight-lines) BF, FG (respectively). And anἔδει ποιῆσαι. gle AFG (is) equal to angle BFG. Thus, the base AG is
102
STOIQEIWN gþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 3
equal to the base BG [Prop. 1.4]. Thus, a circle of center
G, and radius GA, being drawn, will also go through B
(as well as A). Let it go like AEB (in the third diagram
from the left). And since AD is at right-angles to the diameter AE, at its extremity, AD thus touches circle AEB
[Prop. 3.16 corr.]. And AB has been drawn across (the
circle) from the point of contact A. Thus, angle BAD is
equal to the angle constructed in the alternate segment
AHB of the circle [Prop. 3.32]. But, angle BAD is equal
to C. Thus, the angle in segment AHB is also equal to
C.
Thus, a segment AHB of a circle, accepting an angle
equal to C, has been drawn on the given straight-line AB.
(Which is) the very thing it was required to do.
ldþ. Proposition 34
᾿Απὸ τοῦ δοθέντος κύκλου τμῆμα ἀφελεῖν δεχόμενον To cut off a segment, accepting an angle equal to a
γωνίαν ἴσην τῇ δοθείσῃ γωνίᾳ εὐθυγράμμῳ. given rectilinear angle, from a given circle.
Γ
Ε Α
Β
∆
Ζ
D
A E
B
F
C
῎Εστω ὁ δοθεὶς κύκλος ὁ ΑΒΓ, ἡ δὲ δοθεῖσα γωνία Let ABC be the given circle, and D the given rectilinεὐθύγραμμος ἡ πρὸς τῷ Δ· δεῖ δὴ ἀπὸ τοῦ ΑΒΓ κύκλου ear angle. So it is required to cut off a segment, accepting
τμῆμα ἀφελεῖν δεχόμενον γωνίαν ἴσην τῇ δοθείσῃ γωνίᾳ an angle equal to the given rectilinear angle D, from the
εὐθυγράμμῳ τῇ πρὸς τῷ Δ. given circle ABC.
῎Ηχθω τοῦ ΑΒΓ ἐφαπτομένη ἡ ΕΖ κατὰ τὸ Β σημεῖον, Let EF have been drawn touching ABC at point B.
†
καὶ συνεστάτω πρὸς τῇ ΖΒ εὐθείᾳ καὶ τῷ πρὸς αὐτῇ σημείῳ And let (angle) FBC, equal to angle D, have been conτῷ Β τῇ πρὸς τῷ Δ γωνίᾳ ἴση ἡ ὑπὸ ΖΒΓ. structed on the straight-line FB, at the point B on it
᾿Επεὶ οὖν κύκλου τοῦ ΑΒΓ ἐφάπτεταί τις εὐθεῖα ἡ ΕΖ, [Prop. 1.23].
καὶ ἀπὸ τῆς κατὰ τὸ Β ἐπαφῆς διῆκται ἡ ΒΓ, ἡ ὑπὸ ΖΒΓ ἄρα Therefore, since some straight-line EF touches the
γωνία ἴση ἐστὶ τῇ ἐν τῷ ΒΑΓ ἐναλλὰξ τμήματι συνισταμένῃ circle ABC, and BC has been drawn across (the circle)
γωνίᾳ. ἀλλ᾿ ἡ ὑπὸ ΖΒΓ τῇ πρὸς τῷ Δ ἐστιν ἴση· καὶ ἡ ἐν from the point of contact B, angle FBC is thus equal
τῷ ΒΑΓ ἄρα τμήματι ἴση ἐστὶ τῇ πρὸς τῷ Δ [γωνίᾳ]. to the angle constructed in the alternate segment BAC
᾿Απὸ τοῦ δοθέντος ἄρα κύκλου τοῦ ΑΒΓ τμῆμα ἀφῄρηται [Prop. 1.32]. But, FBC is equal to D. Thus, the (angle)
τὸ ΒΑΓ δεχόμενον γωνίαν ἴσην τῇ δοθείσῃ γωνίᾳ εὐθυγράμ- in the segment BAC is also equal to [angle] D.
μῳ τῇ πρὸς τῷ Δ· ὅπερ ἔδει ποιῆσαι. Thus, the segment BAC, accepting an angle equal to
the given rectilinear angle D, has been cut off from the
given circle ABC. (Which is) the very thing it was required to do.
† Presumably, by finding the center of ABC [Prop. 3.1], drawing a straight-line between the center and point B, and then drawing EF through
103
STOIQEIWN gþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 3
point B, at right-angles to the aforementioned straight-line [Prop. 1.11].
leþ. Proposition 35
᾿Εὰν ἐν κύκλῳ δύο εὐθεῖαι τέμνωσιν ἀλλήλας, τὸ ὑπὸ If two straight-lines in a circle cut one another then
τῶν τῆς μιᾶς τμημάτων περιεχόμενον ὀρθογώνιον ἴσον ἐστὶ the rectangle contained by the pieces of one is equal to
τῷ ὑπὸ τῶν τῆς ἑτέρας τμημάτων περιεχομένῳ ὀρθογωνίῳ. the rectangle contained by the pieces of the other.
Α
Ε
Γ
Θ
∆
Β ∆
Β
Γ
Α
Ε
Ζ
Η
A
E
G
B C
E
B D
D
C
F
H
A
᾿Εν γὰρ κύκλῳ τῷ ΑΒΓΔ δύο εὐθεῖαι αἱ ΑΓ, ΒΔ For let the two straight-lines AC and BD, in the circle
τεμνέτωσαν ἀλλήλας κατὰ τὸ Ε σημεῖον· λέγω, ὅτι τὸ ὑπὸ ABCD, cut one another at point E. I say that the rectτῶν ΑΕ, ΕΓ περιεχόμενον ὀρθογώνιον ἴσον ἐστὶ τῷ ὑπὸ angle contained by AE and EC is equal to the rectangle
τῶν ΔΕ, ΕΒ περιεχομένῳ ὀρθογωνίῳ. contained by DE and EB.
Εἰ μὲν οὖν αἱ ΑΓ, ΒΔ διὰ τοῦ κέντρου εἰσὶν ὥστε τὸ Ε In fact, if AC and BD are through the center (as in
κέντρον εἶναι τοῦ ΑΒΓΔ κύκλου, φανερόν, ὅτι ἴσων οὐσῶν the first diagram from the left), so that E is the center of
τῶν ΑΕ, ΕΓ, ΔΕ, ΕΒ καὶ τὸ ὑπὸ τῶν ΑΕ, ΕΓ περιεχόμενον circle ABCD, then (it is) clear that, AE, EC, DE, and
ὀρθογώνιον ἴσον ἐστὶ τῷ ὑπὸ τῶν ΔΕ, ΕΒ περιεχομένῳ EB being equal, the rectangle contained by AE and EC
ὀρθογωνίῳ. is also equal to the rectangle contained by DE and EB.
Μὴ ἔστωσαν δὴ αἱ ΑΓ, ΔΒ διὰ τοῦ κέντρου, καὶ So let AC and DB not be though the center (as in
εἰλήφθω τὸ κέντρον τοῦ ΑΒΓΔ, καὶ ἔστω τὸ Ζ, καὶ ἀπὸ the second diagram from the left), and let the center of
τοῦ Ζ ἐπὶ τὰς ΑΓ, ΔΒ εὐθείας κάθετοι ἤχθωσαν αἱ ΖΗ, ABCD have been found [Prop. 3.1], and let it be (at) F.
ΖΘ, καὶ ἐπεζεύχθωσαν αἱ ΖΒ, ΖΓ, ΖΕ. And let FG and FH have been drawn from F, perpenΚαὶ ἐπεὶ εὐθεῖά τις διὰ τοῦ κέντρου ἡ ΗΖ εὐθεῖάν τινα dicular to the straight-lines AC and DB (respectively)
μὴ διὰ τοῦ κέντρου τὴν ΑΓ πρὸς ὀρθὰς τέμνει, καὶ δίχα [Prop. 1.12]. And let FB, FC, and FE have been joined.
αὐτὴν τέμνει· ἴση ἄρα ἡ ΑΗ τῇ ΗΓ. ἐπεὶ οὖν εὐθεῖα ἡ ΑΓ And since some straight-line, GF, through the center,
τέτμηται εἰς μὲν ἴσα κατὰ τὸ Η, εἰς δὲ ἄνισα κατὰ τὸ Ε, τὸ cuts at right-angles some (other) straight-line, AC, not
ἄρα ὑπὸ τῶν ΑΕ, ΕΓ περιεχόμενον ὀρθογώνιον μετὰ τοῦ through the center, then it also cuts it in half [Prop. 3.3].
ἀπὸ τῆς ΕΗ τετραγώνου ἴσον ἐστὶ τῷ ἀπὸ τῆς ΗΓ· [κοινὸν] Thus, AG (is) equal to GC. Therefore, since the straightπροσκείσθω τὸ ἀπὸ τῆς ΗΖ· τὸ ἄρα ὑπὸ τῶν ΑΕ, ΕΓ μετὰ line AC is cut equally at G, and unequally at E, the
τῶν ἀπὸ τῶν ΗΕ, ΗΖ ἴσον ἐστὶ τοῖς ἀπὸ τῶν ΓΗ, ΗΖ. ἀλλὰ rectangle contained by AE and EC plus the square on
τοῖς μὲν ἀπὸ τῶν ΕΗ, ΗΖ ἴσον ἐστὶ τὸ ἀπὸ τῆς ΖΕ, τοὶς EG is thus equal to the (square) on GC [Prop. 2.5]. Let
δὲ ἀπὸ τῶν ΓΗ, ΗΖ ἴσον ἐστὶ τὸ ἀπὸ τῆς ΖΓ· τὸ ἄρα ὑπὸ the (square) on GF have been added [to both]. Thus,
τῶν ΑΕ, ΕΓ μετὰ τοῦ ἀπὸ τῆς ΖΕ ἴσον ἐστὶ τῷ ἀπὸ τῆς the (rectangle contained) by AE and EC plus the (sum
ΖΓ. ἴση δὲ ἡ ΖΓ τῇ ΖΒ· τὸ ἄρα ὑπὸ τῶν ΑΕ, ΕΓ μετὰ τοῦ of the squares) on GE and GF is equal to the (sum of
ἀπὸ τῆς ΕΖ ἴσον ἐστὶ τῷ ἀπὸ τῆς ΖΒ. διὰ τὰ αὐτὰ δὴ καὶ the squares) on CG and GF. But, the (square) on FE
τὸ ὑπὸ τῶν ΔΕ, ΕΒ μετὰ τοῦ ἀπὸ τῆς ΖΕ ἰσον ἐστὶ τῷ ἀπὸ is equal to the (sum of the squares) on EG and GF
τῆς ΖΒ. ἐδείχθη δὲ καὶ τὸ ὑπὸ τῶν ΑΕ, ΕΓ μετὰ τοῦ ἀπὸ [Prop. 1.47], and the (square) on FC is equal to the (sum
τῆς ΖΕ ἴσον τῷ ἀπὸ τῆς ΖΒ· τὸ ἄρα ὑπὸ τῶν ΑΕ, ΕΓ μετὰ of the squares) on CG and GF [Prop. 1.47]. Thus, the
τοῦ ἀπὸ τῆς ΖΕ ἴσον ἐστὶ τῷ ὑπὸ τῶν ΔΕ, ΕΒ μετὰ τοῦ (rectangle contained) by AE and EC plus the (square)
ἀπὸ τῆς ΖΕ. κοινὸν ἀφῇρήσθω τὸ ἀπὸ τῆς ΖΕ· λοιπὸν ἄρα on FE is equal to the (square) on FC. And FC (is)
τὸ ὑπὸ τῶν ΑΕ, ΕΓ περιεχόμενον ὀρθογώνιον ἴσον ἐστὶ τῷ equal to FB. Thus, the (rectangle contained) by AE
ὑπὸ τῶν ΔΕ, ΕΒ περιεχομένῳ ὀρθογωνίῳ. and EC plus the (square) on FE is equal to the (square)
᾿Εὰν ἄρα ἐν κύκλῳ εὐθεῖαι δύο τέμνωσιν ἀλλήλας, τὸ on FB. So, for the same (reasons), the (rectangle conὑπὸ τῶν τῆς μιᾶς τμημάτων περιεχόμενον ὀρθογώνιον ἴσον tained) by DE and EB plus the (square) on FE is equal
104
STOIQEIWN gþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 3
ἐστὶ τῷ ὑπὸ τῶν τῆς ἑτέρας τμημάτων περιεχομένῳ ὀρθο- to the (square) on FB. And the (rectangle contained)
γωνίῳ· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. by AE and EC plus the (square) on FE was also shown
(to be) equal to the (square) on FB. Thus, the (rectangle contained) by AE and EC plus the (square) on
FE is equal to the (rectangle contained) by DE and EB
plus the (square) on FE. Let the (square) on FE have
been taken from both. Thus, the remaining rectangle contained by AE and EC is equal to the rectangle contained
by DE and EB.
Thus, if two straight-lines in a circle cut one another
then the rectangle contained by the pieces of one is equal
to the rectangle contained by the pieces of the other.
(Which is) the very thing it was required to show.
lþ. Proposition 36
᾿Εὰν κύκλου ληφθῇ τι σημεῖον ἐκτός, καὶ ἀπ᾿ αὐτοῦ If some point is taken outside a circle, and two
πρὸς τὸν κύκλον προσπίπτωσι δύο εὐθεῖαι, καὶ ἡ μὲν αὐτῶν straight-lines radiate from it towards the circle, and (one)
τέμνῃ τὸν κύκλον, ἡ δὲ ἐφάπτηται, ἔσται τὸ ὑπὸ ὅλης τῆς of them cuts the circle, and the (other) touches (it), then
τεμνούσης καὶ τῆς ἐκτὸς ἀπολαμβανομένης μεταξὺ τοῦ τε the (rectangle contained) by the whole (straight-line)
σημείου καὶ τῆς κυρτῆς περιφερείας ἴσον τῷ ἀπὸ τῆς ἐφα- cutting (the circle), and the (part of it) cut off outside
πτομένης τετραγώνῳ. (the circle), between the point and the convex circumference, will be equal to the square on the tangent (line).
Ε
Γ
Ζ
Α
Β
Α
Β
∆
∆
Ζ
Γ
E
D
B F
A
F
A
C B
D
C
Κύκλου γὰρ τοῦ ΑΒΓ εἰλήφθω τι σημεῖον ἐκτὸς τὸ Δ, For let some point D have been taken outside circle
καὶ ἀπὸ τοῦ Δ πρὸς τὸν ΑΒΓ κύκλον προσπιπτέτωσαν δύο ABC, and let two straight-lines, DC[A] and DB, radiεὐθεῖαι αἱ ΔΓ[Α], ΔΒ· καὶ ἡ μὲν ΔΓΑ τεμνέτω τὸν ΑΒΓ ate from D towards circle ABC. And let DCA cut circle
κύκλον, ἡ δὲ ΒΔ ἐφαπτέσθω· λέγω, ὅτι τὸ ὑπὸ τῶν ΑΔ, ABC, and let BD touch (it). I say that the rectangle
ΔΓ περιεχόμενον ὀρθογώνιον ἴσον ἐστὶ τῷ ἀπὸ τῆς ΔΒ contained by AD and DC is equal to the square on DB.
τετραγώνῳ. [D]CA is surely either through the center, or not. Let
῾Η ἄρα [Δ]ΓΑ ἤτοι διὰ τοῦ κέντρου ἐστὶν ἢ οὔ. ἔστω it first of all be through the center, and let F be the cenπρότερον διὰ τοῦ κέντρου, καὶ ἔστω τὸ Ζ κέντρον τοῦ ΑΒΓ ter of circle ABC, and let FB have been joined. Thus,
κύκλου, καὶ ἐπεζεύχθω ἡ ΖΒ· ὀρθὴ ἄρα ἐστὶν ἡ ὑπὸ ΖΒΔ. (angle) FBD is a right-angle [Prop. 3.18]. And since
καὶ ἐπεὶ εὐθεῖα ἡ ΑΓ δίχα τέτμηται κατὰ τὸ Ζ, πρόσκειται straight-line AC is cut in half at F, let CD have been
δὲ αὐτῇ ἡ ΓΔ, τὸ ἄρα ὑπὸ τῶν ΑΔ, ΔΓ μετὰ τοῦ ἀπὸ τῆς added to it. Thus, the (rectangle contained) by AD and
ΖΓ ἴσον ἐστὶ τῷ ἀπὸ τῆς ΖΔ. ἴση δὲ ἡ ΖΓ τῇ ΖΒ· τὸ ἄρα DC plus the (square) on FC is equal to the (square) on
ὑπὸ τῶν ΑΔ, ΔΓ μετὰ τοῦ ἀπὸ τῆς ΖΒ ἴσον ἐστὶ τῷ ἀπὸ FD [Prop. 2.6]. And FC (is) equal to FB. Thus, the
τὴς ΖΔ. τῷ δὲ ἀπὸ τῆς ΖΔ ἴσα ἐστὶ τὰ ἀπὸ τῶν ΖΒ, ΒΔ· (rectangle contained) by AD and DC plus the (square)
τὸ ἄρα ὑπὸ τῶν ΑΔ, ΔΓ μετὰ τοῦ ἀπὸ τῆς ΖΒ ἴσον ἐστὶ on FB is equal to the (square) on FD. And the (square)
τοῖς ἀπὸ τῶν ΖΒ, ΒΔ. κοινὸν ἀφῃρήσθω τὸ ἀπὸ τῆς ΖΒ· on FD is equal to the (sum of the squares) on FB and
λοιπὸν ἄρα τὸ ὑπὸ τῶν ΑΔ, ΔΓ ἴσον ἐστὶ τῷ ἀπὸ τῆς ΔΒ BD [Prop. 1.47]. Thus, the (rectangle contained) by AD
105
STOIQEIWN gþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 3
ἐφαπτομένης. and DC plus the (square) on FB is equal to the (sum
᾿Αλλὰ δὴ ἡ ΔΓΑ μὴ ἔστω διὰ τοῦ κέντρου τοῦ ΑΒΓ of the squares) on FB and BD. Let the (square) on
κύκλου, καὶ εἰλήφθω τὸ κέντρον τὸ Ε, καὶ ἀπὸ τοῦ Ε ἐπὶ FB have been subtracted from both. Thus, the remainτὴν ΑΓ κάθετος ἤχθω ἡ ΕΖ, καὶ ἐπεζεύχθωσαν αἱ ΕΒ, ΕΓ, ing (rectangle contained) by AD and DC is equal to the
ΕΔ· ὀρθὴ ἄρα ἐστὶν ἡ ὑπὸ ΕΒΔ. καὶ ἐπεὶ εὐθεῖά τις διὰ τοῦ (square) on the tangent DB.
κέντρου ἡ ΕΖ εὐθεῖάν τινα μὴ διὰ τοῦ κέντρου τὴν ΑΓ πρὸς And so let DCA not be through the center of cirὀρθὰς τέμνει, καὶ δίχα αὐτὴν τέμνει· ἡ ΑΖ ἄρα τῇ ΖΓ ἐστιν cle ABC, and let the center E have been found, and
ἴση. καὶ ἐπεὶ εὐθεῖα ἡ ΑΓ τέτμηται δίχα κατὰ τὸ Ζ σημεῖον, let EF have been drawn from E, perpendicular to AC
πρόσκειται δὲ αὐτῇ ἡ ΓΔ, τὸ ἄρα ὑπὸ τῶν ΑΔ, ΔΓ μετὰ τοῦ [Prop. 1.12]. And let EB, EC, and ED have been joined.
ἀπὸ τῆς ΖΓ ἴσον ἐστὶ τῷ ἀπὸ τῆς ΖΔ. κοινὸν προσκείσθω (Angle) EBD (is) thus a right-angle [Prop. 3.18]. And
τὸ ἀπὸ τῆς ΖΕ· τὸ ἄρα ὑπὸ τῶν ΑΔ, ΔΓ μετὰ τῶν ἀπὸ τῶν since some straight-line, EF, through the center, cuts
ΓΖ, ΖΕ ἴσον ἐστὶ τοῖς ἀπὸ τῶν ΖΔ, ΖΕ. τοῖς δὲ ἀπὸ τῶν some (other) straight-line, AC, not through the center,
ΓΖ, ΖΕ ἴσον ἐστὶ τὸ ἀπὸ τῆς ΕΓ· ὀρθὴ γὰρ [ἐστιν] ἡ ὑπὸ at right-angles, it also cuts it in half [Prop. 3.3]. Thus,
ΕΖΓ [γωνία]· τοῖς δὲ ἀπὸ τῶν ΔΖ, ΖΕ ἴσον ἐστὶ τὸ ἀπὸ τῆς AF is equal to FC. And since the straight-line AC is cut
ΕΔ· τὸ ἄρα ὑπὸ τῶν ΑΔ, ΔΓ μετὰ τοῦ ἀπὸ τῆς ΕΓ ἴσον in half at point F, let CD have been added to it. Thus, the
ἐστὶ τῷ ἀπὸ τῆς ΕΔ. ἴση δὲ ἡ ΕΓ τῂ ΕΒ· τὸ ἄρα ὑπὸ τῶν (rectangle contained) by AD and DC plus the (square)
ΑΔ, ΔΓ μετὰ τοῦ ἀπὸ τῆς ΕΒ ἴσον ἐστὶ τῷ ἄπὸ τῆς ΕΔ. on FC is equal to the (square) on FD [Prop. 2.6]. Let
τῷ δὲ ἀπὸ τῆς ΕΔ ἴσα ἐστὶ τὰ ἀπὸ τῶν ΕΒ, ΒΔ· ὀρθὴ γὰρ the (square) on FE have been added to both. Thus, the
ἡ ὑπὸ ΕΒΔ γωνία· τὸ ἄρα ὑπὸ τῶν ΑΔ, ΔΓ μετὰ τοῦ ἀπὸ (rectangle contained) by AD and DC plus the (sum of
τῆς ΕΒ ἴσον ἐστὶ τοῖς ἀπὸ τῶν ΕΒ, ΒΔ. κοινὸν ἀφῃρήσθω the squares) on CF and FE is equal to the (sum of the
τὸ ἀπὸ τῆς ΕΒ· λοιπὸν ἄρα τὸ ὑπὸ τῶν ΑΔ, ΔΓ ἴσον ἐστὶ squares) on FD and FE. But the (square) on EC is equal
τῷ ἀπὸ τῆς ΔΒ. to the (sum of the squares) on CF and FE. For [angle]
᾿Εὰν ἄρα κύκλου ληφθῇ τι σημεῖον ἐκτός, καὶ ἀπ᾿ αὐτοῦ EFC [is] a right-angle [Prop. 1.47]. And the (square)
πρὸς τὸν κύκλον προσπίπτωσι δύο εὐθεῖαι, καὶ ἡ μὲν αὐτῶν on ED is equal to the (sum of the squares) on DF and
τέμνῃ τὸν κύκλον, ἡ δὲ ἐφάπτηται, ἔσται τὸ ὑπὸ ὅλης τῆς FE [Prop. 1.47]. Thus, the (rectangle contained) by AD
τεμνούσης καὶ τῆς ἐκτὸς ἀπολαμβανομένης μεταξὺ τοῦ τε and DC plus the (square) on EC is equal to the (square)
σημείου καὶ τῆς κυρτῆς περιφερείας ἴσον τῷ ἀπὸ τῆς ἐφα- on ED. And EC (is) equal to EB. Thus, the (rectanπτομένης τετραγώνῳ· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. gle contained) by AD and DC plus the (square) on EB
is equal to the (square) on ED. And the (sum of the
squares) on EB and BD is equal to the (square) on ED.
For EBD (is) a right-angle [Prop. 1.47]. Thus, the (rectangle contained) by AD and DC plus the (square) on
EB is equal to the (sum of the squares) on EB and BD.
Let the (square) on EB have been subtracted from both.
Thus, the remaining (rectangle contained) by AD and
DC is equal to the (square) on BD.
Thus, if some point is taken outside a circle, and two
straight-lines radiate from it towards the circle, and (one)
of them cuts the circle, and (the other) touches (it), then
the (rectangle contained) by the whole (straight-line)
cutting (the circle), and the (part of it) cut off outside
(the circle), between the point and the convex circumference, will be equal to the square on the tangent (line).
(Which is) the very thing it was required to show.
lzþ. Proposition 37
᾿Εὰν κύκλου ληφθῇ τι σημεῖον ἐκτός, ἀπὸ δὲ τοῦ If some point is taken outside a circle, and two
σημείου πρὸς τὸν κύκλον προσπίπτωσι δύο εὐθεῖαι, καὶ straight-lines radiate from the point towards the circle,
ἡ μὲν αὐτῶν τέμνῃ τὸν κύκλον, ἡ δὲ προσπίπτῃ, ᾖ δὲ τὸ and one of them cuts the circle, and the (other) meets
ὑπὸ [τῆς] ὅλης τῆς τεμνούσης καὶ τῆς ἐκτὸς ἀπολαμβα- (it), and the (rectangle contained) by the whole (straight106
STOIQEIWN gþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 3
νομένης μεταξὺ τοῦ τε σημείου καὶ τῆς κυρτῆς περιφερείας line) cutting (the circle), and the (part of it) cut off outἴσον τῷ ἀπὸ τῆς προσπιπτούσης, ἡ προσπίπτουσα ἐφάψεται side (the circle), between the point and the convex cirτοῦ κύκλου. cumference, is equal to the (square) on the (straight-line)
meeting (the circle), then the (straight-line) meeting (the
circle) will touch the circle.
Ε
Ζ
Α
∆
Β
Γ
E
F
B A
D
C
Κύκλου γὰρ τοῦ ΑΒΓ εἰλήφθω τι σημεῖον ἐκτὸς τὸ Δ, For let some point D have been taken outside circle
καὶ ἀπὸ τοῦ Δ πρὸς τὸν ΑΒΓ κύκλον προσπιπτέτωσαν δύο ABC, and let two straight-lines, DCA and DB, radiate
εὐθεῖαι αἱ ΔΓΑ, ΔΒ, καὶ ἡ μὲν ΔΓΑ τεμνέτω τὸν κύκλον, ἡ from D towards circle ABC, and let DCA cut the circle,
δὲ ΔΒ προσπιπτέτω, ἔστω δὲ τὸ ὑπὸ τῶν ΑΔ, ΔΓ ἴσον τῷ and let DB meet (the circle). And let the (rectangle conἀπὸ τῆς ΔΒ. λέγω, ὅτι ἡ ΔΒ ἐφάπτεται τοῦ ΑΒΓ κύκλου. tained) by AD and DC be equal to the (square) on DB.
῎Ηχθω γὰρ τοῦ ΑΒΓ ἐφαπτομένη ἡ ΔΕ, καὶ εἰλήφθω τὸ I say that DB touches circle ABC.
κέντρον τοῦ ΑΒΓ κύκλου, καὶ ἔστω τὸ Ζ, καὶ ἐπεζεύχθωσαν For let DE have been drawn touching ABC [Prop.
αἱ ΖΕ, ΖΒ, ΖΔ. ἡ ἄρα ὑπὸ ΖΕΔ ὀρθή ἐστιν. καὶ ἐπεὶ ἡ ΔΕ 3.17], and let the center of the circle ABC have been
ἐφάπτεται τοῦ ΑΒΓ κύκλου, τέμνει δὲ ἡ ΔΓΑ, τὸ ἄρα ὑπὸ found, and let it be (at) F. And let FE, FB, and FD
τῶν ΑΔ, ΔΓ ἴσον ἐστὶ τῷ ἀπὸ τῆς ΔΕ. ἦν δὲ καὶ τὸ ὑπὸ have been joined. (Angle) FED is thus a right-angle
τῶν ΑΔ, ΔΓ ἴσον τῷ ἀπὸ τῆς ΔΒ· τὸ ἄρα ἀπὸ τῆς ΔΕ [Prop. 3.18]. And since DE touches circle ABC, and
ἴσον ἐστὶ τῷ ἀπὸ τῆς ΔΒ· ἴση ἄρα ἡ ΔΕ τῇ ΔΒ. ἐστὶ δὲ DCA cuts (it), the (rectangle contained) by AD and DC
καὶ ἡ ΖΕ τῇ ΖΒ ἴση· δύο δὴ αἱ ΔΕ, ΕΖ δύο ταῖς ΔΒ, ΒΖ is thus equal to the (square) on DE [Prop. 3.36]. And the
ἴσαι εἰσίν· καὶ βάσις αὐτῶν κοινὴ ἡ ΖΔ· γωνία ἄρα ἡ ὑπὸ (rectangle contained) by AD and DC was also equal to
ΔΕΖ γωνίᾳ τῇ ὑπὸ ΔΒΖ ἐστιν ἴση. ὀρθὴ δὲ ἡ ὑπὸ ΔΕΖ· the (square) on DB. Thus, the (square) on DE is equal
ὀρθὴ ἄρα καὶ ἡ ὑπὸ ΔΒΖ. καί ἐστιν ἡ ΖΒ ἐκβαλλομένη to the (square) on DB. Thus, DE (is) equal to DB. And
διάμετρος· ἡ δὲ τῇ διαμέτρῳ τοῦ κύκλου πρὸς ὀρθὰς ἀπ᾿ FE is also equal to FB. So the two (straight-lines) DE,
ἄκρας ἀγομένη ἐφάπτεται τοῦ κύκλου· ἡ ΔΒ ἄρα ἐφάπτεται EF are equal to the two (straight-lines) DB, BF (reτοῦ ΑΒΓ κύκλου. ὁμοίως δὴ δειχθήσεται, κἂν τὸ κέντρον spectively). And their base, FD, is common. Thus, angle
ἐπὶ τῆς ΑΓ τυγχάνῃ. DEF is equal to angle DBF [Prop. 1.8]. And DEF (is)
᾿Εὰν ἄρα κύκλου ληφθῇ τι σημεῖον ἐκτός, ἀπὸ δὲ τοῦ a right-angle. Thus, DBF (is) also a right-angle. And
σημείου πρὸς τὸν κύκλον προσπίπτωσι δύο εὐθεῖαι, καὶ ἡ FB produced is a diameter, And a (straight-line) drawn
μὲν αὐτῶν τέμνῃ τὸν κύκλον, ἡ δὲ προσπίπτῃ, ᾖ δὲ τὸ ὑπὸ at right-angles to a diameter of a circle, at its extremity,
ὅλης τῆς τεμνούσης καὶ τῆς ἐκτὸς ἀπολαμβανομένης μεταξὺ touches the circle [Prop. 3.16 corr.]. Thus, DB touches
τοῦ τε σημείου καὶ τῆς κυρτῆς περιφερείας ἴσον τῷ ἀπὸ circle ABC. Similarly, (the same thing) can be shown,
τῆς προσπιπτούσης, ἡ προσπίπτουσα ἐφάψεται τοῦ κύκλου· even if the center happens to be on AC.
ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. Thus, if some point is taken outside a circle, and two
straight-lines radiate from the point towards the circle,
and one of them cuts the circle, and the (other) meets
(it), and the (rectangle contained) by the whole (straightline) cutting (the circle), and the (part of it) cut off outside (the circle), between the point and the convex circumference, is equal to the (square) on the (straight-line)
meeting (the circle), then the (straight-line) meeting (the
circle) will touch the circle. (Which is) the very thing it
107
STOIQEIWN gþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 3
was required to show.
108
ELEMENTS BOOK 4
Construction of Rectilinear Figures In and
Around Circles
109
STOIQEIWN dþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 4
VOroi. Definitions
αʹ. Σχῆμα εὐθύγραμμον εἰς σχῆμα εὐθύγραμμον ἐγγράφ- 1. A rectilinear figure is said to be inscribed in
εσθαι λέγεται, ὅταν ἑκάστη τῶν τοῦ ἐγγραφομένου σχήματ- a(nother) rectilinear figure when the respective angles
ος γωνιῶν ἑκάστης πλευρᾶς τοῦ, εἰς ὃ ἐγγράφεται, ἅπτηται. of the inscribed figure touch the respective sides of the
βʹ. Σχῆμα δὲ ὁμοίως περὶ σχῆμα περιγράφεσθαι λέγεται, (figure) in which it is inscribed.
ὅταν ἑκάστη πλευρὰ τοῦ περιγραφομένου ἑκάστης γωνίας 2. And, similarly, a (rectilinear) figure is said to be cirτοῦ, περὶ ὃ περιγράφεται, ἅπτηται. cumscribed about a(nother rectilinear) figure when the
γʹ. Σχῆμα εὐθύγραμμον εἰς κύκλον ἐγγράφεσθαι λέγεται, respective sides of the circumscribed (figure) touch the
ὅταν ἑκάστη γωνία τοῦ ἐγγραφομένου ἅπτηται τῆς τοῦ respective angles of the (figure) about which it is circumκύκλου περιφερείας. scribed.
δʹ. Σχῆμα δὲ εὐθύγραμμον περὶ κύκλον περιγράφε- 3. A rectilinear figure is said to be inscribed in a cirσθαι λέγεται, ὅταν ἑκάστη πλευρὰ τοῦ περιγραφομένου cle when each angle of the inscribed (figure) touches the
ἐφάπτηται τῆς τοῦ κύκλου περιφερείας. circumference of the circle.
εʹ. Κύκλος δὲ εἰς σχῆμα ὁμοίως ἐγγράφεσθαι λέγεται, 4. And a rectilinear figure is said to be circumscribed
ὅταν ἡ τοῦ κύκλου περιφέρεια ἑκάστης πλευρᾶς τοῦ, εἰς ὃ about a circle when each side of the circumscribed (figἐγγράφεται, ἅπτηται. ure) touches the circumference of the circle.
ϛʹ. Κύκλος δὲ περὶ σχῆμα περιγράφεσθαι λέγεται, ὅταν 5. And, similarly, a circle is said to be inscribed in a
ἡ τοῦ κύκλου περιφέρεια ἑκάστης γωνίας τοῦ, περὶ ὃ πε- (rectilinear) figure when the circumference of the circle
ριγράφεται, ἅπτηται. touches each side of the (figure) in which it is inscribed.
ζʹ. Εὐθεῖα εἰς κύκλον ἐναρμόζεσθαι λέγεται, ὅταν τὰ 6. And a circle is said to be circumscribed about a
πέρατα αὐτῆς ἐπὶ τῆς περιφερείας ᾖ τοῦ κύκλου. rectilinear (figure) when the circumference of the circle
touches each angle of the (figure) about which it is circumscribed.
7. A straight-line is said to be inserted into a circle
when its extemities are on the circumference of the circle.
aþ. Proposition 1
Εἰς τὸν δοθέντα κύκλον τῇ δοθείσῃ εὐθείᾳ μὴ μείζονι To insert a straight-line equal to a given straight-line
οὔσῃ τῆς τοῦ κύκλου διαμέτρου ἴσην εὐθεῖαν ἐναρμόσαι. into a circle, (the latter straight-line) not being greater
than the diameter of the circle.
Ε
∆
Β Γ
Ζ
Α
F
D
B C E
A
῎Εστω ὁ δοθεὶς κύκλος ὁ ΑΒΓ, ἡ δὲ δοθεῖσα εὐθεῖα μὴ Let ABC be the given circle, and D the given straightμείζων τῆς τοῦ κύκλου διαμέτρου ἡ Δ. δεῖ δὴ εἰς τὸν ΑΒΓ line (which is) not greater than the diameter of the cirκύκλον τῇ Δ εὐθείᾳ ἴσην εὐθεῖαν ἐναρμόσαι. cle. So it is required to insert a straight-line, equal to the
῎Ηχθω τοῦ ΑΒΓ κύκλου διάμετρος ἡ ΒΓ. εἰ μὲν οὖν ἴση straight-line D, into the circle ABC.
ἐστὶν ἡ ΒΓ τῇ Δ, γεγονὸς ἂν εἴη τὸ ἐπιταχθέν· ἐνήρμοσται Let a diameter BC of circle ABC have been drawn.†
110
STOIQEIWN dþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 4
γὰρ εἰς τὸν ΑΒΓ κύκλον τῇ Δ εὐθείᾳ ἴση ἡ ΒΓ. εἰ δὲ μείζων Therefore, if BC is equal to D then that (which) was
ἐστὶν ἡ ΒΓ τῆς Δ, κείσθω τῇ Δ ἴση ἡ ΓΕ, καὶ κέντρῳ prescribed has taken place. For the (straight-line) BC,
τῷ Γ διαστήματι δὲ τῷ ΓΕ κύκλος γεγράφθω ὁ ΕΑΖ, καὶ equal to the straight-line D, has been inserted into the
ἐπεζεύχθω ἡ ΓΑ. circle ABC. And if BC is greater than D then let CE be
᾿Επεὶ οὖν το Γ σημεῖον κέντρον ἐστὶ τοῦ ΕΑΖ κύκλου, made equal to D [Prop. 1.3], and let the circle EAF have
ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ΓΑ τῇ ΓΕ. ἀλλὰ τῇ Δ ἡ ΓΕ ἐστιν ἴση· καὶ ἡ Δ been drawn with center C and radius CE. And let CA
ἄρα τῇ ΓΑ ἐστιν ἴση. have been joined.
Εἰς ἄρα τὸν δοθέντα κύκλον τὸν ΑΒΓ τῇ δοθείσῃ εὐθείᾳ Therefore, since the point C is the center of circle
τῇ Δ ἴση ἐνήρμοσται ἡ ΓΑ· ὅπερ ἔδει ποιῆσαι. EAF, CA is equal to CE. But, CE is equal to D. Thus,
D is also equal to CA.
Thus, CA, equal to the given straight-line D, has been
inserted into the given circle ABC. (Which is) the very
thing it was required to do.
† Presumably, by finding the center of the circle [Prop. 3.1], and then drawing a line through it.
bþ. Proposition 2
Εἰς τὸν δοθέντα κύκλον τῷ δοθέντι τριγώνῳ ἰσογώνιον To inscribe a triangle, equiangular with a given trianτρίγωνον ἐγγράψαι. gle, in a given circle.
Η
Θ
Γ
Ζ
Α
Β Ε
∆ D
H
C
B E
F
A
G
῎Εστω ὁ δοθεὶς κύκλος ὁ ΑΒΓ, τὸ δὲ δοθὲν τριγωνον Let ABC be the given circle, and DEF the given triτὸ ΔΕΖ· δεῖ δὴ εἰς τὸν ΑΒΓ κύκλον τῷ ΔΕΖ τριγώνῳ angle. So it is required to inscribe a triangle, equiangular
ἰσογώνιον τρίγωνον ἐγγράψαι. with triangle DEF, in circle ABC.
῎Ηχθω τοῦ ΑΒΓ κύκλου ἐφαπτομένη ἡ ΗΘ κατὰ τὸ Α, Let GH have been drawn touching circle ABC at A.
†
καὶ συνεστάτω πρὸς τῇ ΑΘ εὐθείᾳ καὶ τῷ πρὸς αὐτῇ σημείῳ And let (angle) HAC, equal to angle DEF, have been
τῷ Α τῇ ὑπὸ ΔΕΖ γωνίᾳ ἴση ἡ ὑπὸ ΘΑΓ, πρὸς δὲ τῇ ΑΗ constructed on the straight-line AH at the point A on it,
εὐθείᾳ καὶ τῷ πρὸς αὐτῇ σημείῳ τῷ Α τῇ ὑπὸ ΔΖΕ [γωνίᾳ] and (angle) GAB, equal to [angle] DFE, on the straightἴση ἡ ὑπὸ ΗΑΒ, καὶ ἐπεζεύχθω ἡ ΒΓ. line AG at the point A on it [Prop. 1.23]. And let BC
᾿Επεὶ οὖν κύκλου τοῦ ΑΒΓ ἐφάπτεταί τις εὐθεῖα ἡ ΑΘ, have been joined.
καὶ ἀπὸ τῆς κατὰ τὸ Α ἐπαφῆς εἰς τὸν κύκλον διῆκται εὐθεῖα Therefore, since some straight-line AH touches the
ἡ ΑΓ, ἡ ἄρα ὑπὸ ΘΑΓ ἴση ἐστὶ τῇ ἐν τῷ ἐναλλὰξ τοῦ κύκλου circle ABC, and the straight-line AC has been drawn
τμήματι γωνίᾳ τῇ ὑπὸ ΑΒΓ. ἀλλ᾿ ἡ ὑπὸ ΘΑΓ τῇ ὑπὸ ΔΕΖ across (the circle) from the point of contact A, (angle)
ἐστιν ἴση· καὶ ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΒΓ ἄρα γωνία τῇ ὑπὸ ΔΕΖ ἐστιν HAC is thus equal to the angle ABC in the alternate
ἴση. διὰ τὰ αὐτὰ δὴ καὶ ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΓΒ τῇ ὑπὸ ΔΖΕ ἐστιν segment of the circle [Prop. 3.32]. But, HAC is equal to
ἴση· καὶ λοιπὴ ἄρα ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΑΓ λοιπῇ τῇ ὑπὸ ΕΔΖ ἐστιν ἴση DEF. Thus, angle ABC is also equal to DEF. So, for the
[ἰσογώνιον ἄρα ἐστὶ τὸ ΑΒΓ τρίγωνον τῷ ΔΕΖ τριγώνῳ, same (reasons), ACB is also equal to DFE. Thus, the reκαὶ ἐγγέγραπται εἰς τὸν ΑΒΓ κύκλον]. maining (angle) BAC is equal to the remaining (angle)
Εἰς τὸν δοθέντα ἄρα κύκλον τῷ δοθέντι τριγώνῳ EDF [Prop. 1.32]. [Thus, triangle ABC is equianguἰσογώνιον τρίγωνον ἐγγέγραπται· ὅπερ ἔδει ποιῆσαι. lar with triangle DEF, and has been inscribed in circle
111
STOIQEIWN dþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 4
ABC].
Thus, a triangle, equiangular with the given triangle,
has been inscribed in the given circle. (Which is) the very
thing it was required to do.
† See the footnote to Prop. 3.34.
gþ. Proposition 3
Περὶ τὸν δοθέντα κύκλον τῷ δοθέντι τριγώνῳ ἰσογώνιον To circumscribe a triangle, equiangular with a given
τρίγωνον περιγράψαι. triangle, about a given circle.
Α
Μ
Η
Β
∆
Κ
Λ Γ
Θ
Ε
Ζ
Ν
A
L C N
G
H
D
M
E
K
B
F
῎Εστω ὁ δοθεὶς κύκλος ὁ ΑΒΓ, τὸ δὲ δοθὲν τρίγωνον Let ABC be the given circle, and DEF the given triτὸ ΔΕΖ· δεῖ δὴ περὶ τὸν ΑΒΓ κύκλον τῷ ΔΕΖ τριγώνῳ angle. So it is required to circumscribe a triangle, equianἰσογώνιον τρίγωνον περιγράψαι. gular with triangle DEF, about circle ABC.
᾿Εκβεβλήσθω ἡ ΕΖ ἐφ᾿ ἑκάτερα τὰ μέρη κατὰ τὰ Η, Θ Let EF have been produced in each direction to
σημεῖα, καὶ εἰλήφθω τοῦ ΑΒΓ κύκλου κέντρον τὸ Κ, καὶ points G and H. And let the center K of circle ABC
διήχθω, ὡς ἔτυχεν, εὐθεῖα ἡ ΚΒ, καὶ συνεστάτω πρὸς τῇ have been found [Prop. 3.1]. And let the straight-line
ΚΒ εὐθείᾳ καὶ τῷ πρὸς αὐτῇ σημείῳ τῷ Κ τῇ μὲν ὑπὸ ΔΕΗ KB have been drawn, at random, across (ABC). And
γωνίᾳ ἴση ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΚΑ, τῇ δὲ ὑπὸ ΔΖΘ ἴση ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΚΓ, καὶ let (angle) BKA, equal to angle DEG, have been conδιὰ τῶν Α, Β, Γ σημείων ἤχθωσαν ἐφαπτόμεναι τοῦ ΑΒΓ structed on the straight-line KB at the point K on it,
κύκλου αἱ ΛΑΜ, ΜΒΝ, ΝΓΛ. and (angle) BKC, equal to DFH [Prop. 1.23]. And let
Καὶ ἐπεὶ ἐφάπτονται τοῦ ΑΒΓ κύκλου αἱ ΛΜ, ΜΝ, ΝΛ the (straight-lines) LAM, MBN, and NCL have been
κατὰ τὰ Α, Β, Γ σημεῖα, ἀπὸ δὲ τοῦ Κ κέντρου ἐπὶ τὰ Α, Β, drawn through the points A, B, and C (respectively),
Γ σημεῖα ἐπεζευγμέναι εἰσὶν αἱ ΚΑ, ΚΒ, ΚΓ, ὀρθαὶ ἄρα εἰσὶν touching the circle ABC.
†
αἱ πρὸς τοῖς Α, Β, Γ σημείοις γωνίαι. καὶ ἐπεὶ τοῦ ΑΜΒΚ And since LM, MN, and NL touch circle ABC at
τετραπλεύρου αἱ τέσσαρες γωνίαι τέτρασιν ὀρθαῖς ἴσαι εἰσίν, points A, B, and C (respectively), and KA, KB, and
ἐπειδήπερ καὶ εἰς δύο τρίγωνα διαιρεῖται τὸ ΑΜΒΚ, καί εἰσιν KC are joined from the center K to points A, B, and
ὀρθαὶ αἱ ὑπὸ ΚΑΜ, ΚΒΜ γωνίαι, λοιπαὶ ἄρα αἱ ὑπὸ ΑΚΒ, C (respectively), the angles at points A, B, and C are
ΑΜΒ δυσὶν ὀρθαῖς ἴσαι εἰσίν. εἰσὶ δὲ καὶ αἱ ὑπὸ ΔΕΗ, thus right-angles [Prop. 3.18]. And since the (sum of the)
ΔΕΖ δυσὶν ὀρθαῖς ἴσαι· αἱ ἄρα ὑπὸ ΑΚΒ, ΑΜΒ ταῖς ὑπὸ four angles of quadrilateral AMBK is equal to four rightΔΕΗ, ΔΕΖ ἴσαι εἰσίν, ὧν ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΚΒ τῇ ὑπὸ ΔΕΗ ἐστιν angles, inasmuch as AMBK (can) also (be) divided into
ἴση· λοιπὴ ἄρα ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΜΒ λοιπῇ τῇ ὑπὸ ΔΕΖ ἐστιν ἴση. two triangles [Prop. 1.32], and angles KAM and KBM
ὁμοίως δὴ δειχθήσεται, ὅτι καὶ ἡ ὑπὸ ΛΝΒ τῇ ὑπὸ ΔΖΕ are (both) right-angles, the (sum of the) remaining (anἐστιν ἴση· καὶ λοιπὴ ἄρα ἡ ὑπὸ ΜΛΝ [λοιπῇ] τῇ ὑπὸ ΕΔΖ gles), AKB and AMB, is thus equal to two right-angles.
ἐστιν ἴση. ἰσογώνιον ἄρα ἐστὶ τὸ ΛΜΝ τρίγωνον τῷ ΔΕΖ And DEG and DEF is also equal to two right-angles
τριγώνῳ· καὶ περιγέγραπται περὶ τὸν ΑΒΓ κύκλον. [Prop. 1.13]. Thus, AKB and AMB is equal to DEG
Περὶ τὸν δοθέντα ἄρα κύκλον τῷ δοθέντι τριγώνῳ and DEF, of which AKB is equal to DEG. Thus, the reἰσογώνιον τρίγωνον περιγέγραπται· ὅπερ ἔδει ποιῆσαι. mainder AMB is equal to the remainder DEF. So, similarly, it can be shown that LNB is also equal to DFE.
Thus, the remaining (angle) MLN is also equal to the
112
STOIQEIWN dþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 4
[remaining] (angle) EDF [Prop. 1.32]. Thus, triangle
LMN is equiangular with triangle DEF. And it has been
drawn around circle ABC.
Thus, a triangle, equiangular with the given triangle,
has been circumscribed about the given circle. (Which is)
the very thing it was required to do.
† See the footnote to Prop. 3.34.
dþ. Proposition 4
Εἰς τὸ δοθὲν τρίγωνον κύκλον ἐγγράψαι. To inscribe a circle in a given triangle.
∆
Γ
Η
Ζ
Α
Β
Ε G
A
E
B
F
D
C
῎Εστω τὸ δοθὲν τρίγωνον τὸ ΑΒΓ· δεῖ δὴ εἰς τὸ ΑΒΓ Let ABC be the given triangle. So it is required to
τρίγωνον κύκλον ἐγγράψαι. inscribe a circle in triangle ABC.
Τετμήσθωσαν αἱ ὑπὸ ΑΒΓ, ΑΓΒ γωνίαι δίχα ταῖς ΒΔ, Let the angles ABC and ACB have been cut in half by
ΓΔ εὐθείαις, καὶ συμβαλλέτωσαν ἀλλήλαις κατὰ τὸ Δ the straight-lines BD and CD (respectively) [Prop. 1.9],
σημεῖον, καὶ ἤχθωσαν ἀπὸ τοῦ Δ ἐπὶ τὰς ΑΒ, ΒΓ, ΓΑ and let them meet one another at point D, and let DE,
εὐθείας κάθετοι αἱ ΔΕ, ΔΖ, ΔΗ. DF, and DG have been drawn from point D, perpendicΚαὶ ἐπεὶ ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΒΔ γωνία τῇ ὑπὸ ΓΒΔ, ular to the straight-lines AB, BC, and CA (respectively)
ἐστὶ δὲ καὶ ὀρθὴ ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΕΔ ὀρθῇ τῇ ὑπὸ ΒΖΔ ἴση, δύο [Prop. 1.12].
δὴ τρίγωνά ἐστι τὰ ΕΒΔ, ΖΒΔ τὰς δύο γωνίας ταῖς δυσὶ And since angle ABD is equal to CBD, and the rightγωνίαις ἴσας ἔχοντα καὶ μίαν πλευρὰν μιᾷ πλευρᾷ ἴσην τὴν angle BED is also equal to the right-angle BFD, EBD
ὑποτείνουσαν ὑπὸ μίαν τῶν ἴσων γωνιῶν κοινὴν αὐτῶν τὴν and FBD are thus two triangles having two angles equal
ΒΔ· καὶ τὰς λοιπὰς ἄρα πλευρὰς ταῖς λοιπαῖς πλευραῖς ἴσας to two angles, and one side equal to one side—the (one)
ἕξουσιν· ἴση ἄρα ἡ ΔΕ τῇ ΔΖ. διὰ τὰ αὐτὰ δὴ καὶ ἡ ΔΗ subtending one of the equal angles (which is) common to
τῇ ΔΖ ἐστιν ἴση. αἱ τρεῖς ἄρα εὐθεῖαι αἱ ΔΕ, ΔΖ, ΔΗ the (triangles)—(namely), BD. Thus, they will also have
ἴσαι ἀλλήλαις εἰσίν· ὁ ἄρα κέντρῷ τῷ Δ καὶ διαστήματι ἑνὶ the remaining sides equal to the (corresponding) remainτῶν Ε, Ζ, Η κύκλος γραφόμενος ἥξει καὶ διὰ τῶν λοιπῶν ing sides [Prop. 1.26]. Thus, DE (is) equal to DF. So,
σημείων καὶ ἐφάψεται τῶν ΑΒ, ΒΓ, ΓΑ εὐθειῶν διὰ τὸ for the same (reasons), DG is also equal to DF. Thus,
ὀρθὰς εἶναι τὰς πρὸς τοῖς Ε, Ζ, Η σημείοις γωνίας. εἰ γὰρ the three straight-lines DE, DF, and DG are equal to
τεμεῖ αὐτάς, ἔσται ἡ τῇ διαμέτρῳ τοῦ κύκλου πρὸς ὀρθὰς one another. Thus, the circle drawn with center D, and
ἀπ᾿ ἄκρας ἀγομένη ἐντὸς πίπτουσα τοῦ κύκλου· ὅπερ ἄτο- radius one of E, F, or G,
† will also go through the reπον ἐδείχθη· οὐκ ἄρα ὁ κέντρῳ τῷ Δ διαστήματι δὲ ἑνὶ τῶν maining points, and will touch the straight-lines AB, BC,
Ε, Ζ, Η γραφόμενος κύκλος τεμεῖ τὰς ΑΒ, ΒΓ, ΓΑ εὐθείας· and CA, on account of the angles at E, F, and G being
ἐφάψεται ἄρα αὐτῶν, καὶ ἔσται ὁ κύκλος ἐγγεγραμμένος εἰς right-angles. For if it cuts (one of) them then it will be
τὸ ΑΒΓ τρίγωνον. ἐγγεγράφθω ὡς ὁ ΖΗΕ. a (straight-line) drawn at right-angles to a diameter of
Εἰς ἄρα τὸ δοθὲν τρίγωνον τὸ ΑΒΓ κύκλος ἐγγέγραπται the circle, from its extremity, falling inside the circle. The
ὁ ΕΖΗ· ὅπερ ἔδει ποιῆσαι. very thing was shown (to be) absurd [Prop. 3.16]. Thus,
the circle drawn with center D, and radius one of E, F,
113
STOIQEIWN dþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 4
or G, does not cut the straight-lines AB, BC, and CA.
Thus, it will touch them and will be the circle inscribed
in triangle ABC. Let it have been (so) inscribed, like
FGE (in the figure).
Thus, the circle EFG has been inscribed in the given
triangle ABC. (Which is) the very thing it was required
to do.
† Here, and in the following propositions, it is understood that the radius is actually one of DE, DF, or DG.
eþ. Proposition 5
Περὶ τὸ δοθὲν τρίγωνον κύκλον περιγράψαι. To circumscribe a circle about a given triangle.
∆
Ε
Α Α
Ε
Γ Γ
Β
∆
Γ
Β Ζ
Ε
Β
∆
Ζ Ζ
Α
C
D
A
E
B
F
D
A
E
C
B
A
E
F C
B
F
D
῎Εστω τὸ δοθὲν τρίγωνον τὸ ΑΒΓ· δεῖ δὲ περὶ τὸ δοθὲν Let ABC be the given triangle. So it is required to
τρίγωνον τὸ ΑΒΓ κύκλον περιγράψαι. circumscribe a circle about the given triangle ABC.
Τετμήσθωσαν αἱ ΑΒ, ΑΓ εὐθεῖαι δίχα κατὰ τὰ Δ, Ε Let the straight-lines AB and AC have been cut in
σημεῖα, καὶ ἀπὸ τῶν Δ, Ε σημείων ταῖς ΑΒ, ΑΓ πρὸς ὀρθὰς half at points D and E (respectively) [Prop. 1.10]. And
ἤχθωσαν αἱ ΔΖ, ΕΖ· συμπεσοῦνται δὴ ἤτοι ἐντὸς τοῦ ΑΒΓ let DF and EF have been drawn from points D and E,
τριγώνου ἢ ἐπὶ τῆς ΒΓ εὐθείας ἢ ἐκτὸς τῆς ΒΓ. at right-angles to AB and AC (respectively) [Prop. 1.11].
Συμπιπτέτωσαν πρότερον ἐντὸς κατὰ τὸ Ζ, καὶ ἐπεζεύχθ- So (DF and EF) will surely either meet inside triangle
ωσαν αἱ ΖΒ, ΖΓ, ΖΑ. καὶ ἐπεὶ ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ΑΔ τῇ ΔΒ, κοινὴ ABC, on the straight-line BC, or beyond BC.
δὲ καὶ πρὸς ὀρθὰς ἡ ΔΖ, βάσις ἄρα ἡ ΑΖ βάσει τῇ ΖΒ ἐστιν Let them, first of all, meet inside (triangle ABC) at
ἴση. ὁμοίως δὴ δείξομεν, ὅτι καὶ ἡ ΓΖ τῇ ΑΖ ἐστιν ἴση· (point) F, and let FB, FC, and FA have been joined.
ὥστε καὶ ἡ ΖΒ τῇ ΖΓ ἐστιν ἴση· αἱ τρεῖς ἄρα αἱ ΖΑ, ΖΒ, ΖΓ And since AD is equal to DB, and DF is common and
ἴσαι ἀλλήλαις εἰσίν. ὁ ἄρα κέντρῳ τῷ Ζ διαστήματι δὲ ἑνὶ at right-angles, the base AF is thus equal to the base FB
τῶν Α, Β, Γ κύκλος γραφόμενος ἥξει καὶ διὰ τῶν λοιπῶν [Prop. 1.4]. So, similarly, we can show that CF is also
σημείων, καὶ ἔσται περιγεγραμμένος ὁ κύκλος περὶ τὸ ΑΒΓ equal to AF. So that FB is also equal to FC. Thus, the
τρίγωνον. περιγεγράφθω ὡς ὁ ΑΒΓ. three (straight-lines) FA, FB, and FC are equal to one
᾿Αλλὰ δὴ αἱ ΔΖ, ΕΖ συμπιπτέτωσαν ἐπὶ τῆς ΒΓ εὐθείας another. Thus, the circle drawn with center F, and radius
κατὰ τὸ Ζ, ὡς ἔχει ἐπὶ τῆς δευτέρας καταγραφῆς, καὶ one of A, B, or C, will also go through the remaining
ἐπεζεύχθω ἡ ΑΖ. ὁμοίως δὴ δείξομεν, ὅτι τὸ Ζ σημεῖον points. And the circle will have been circumscribed about
κέντρον ἐστὶ τοῦ περὶ τὸ ΑΒΓ τρίγωνον περιγραφομένου triangle ABC. Let it have been (so) circumscribed, like
κύκλου. ABC (in the first diagram from the left).
᾿Αλλὰ δὴ αἱ ΔΖ, ΕΖ συμπιπτέτωσαν ἐκτὸς τοῦ ΑΒΓ And so, let DF and EF meet on the straight-line
τριγώνου κατὰ τὸ Ζ πάλιν, ὡς ἔχει ἐπὶ τῆς τρίτης κατα- BC at (point) F, like in the second diagram (from the
γραφῆς, καί ἐπεζεύχθωσαν αἱ ΑΖ, ΒΖ, ΓΖ. καὶ ἐπεὶ πάλιν left). And let AF have been joined. So, similarly, we can
ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ΑΔ τῇ ΔΒ, κοινὴ δὲ καὶ πρὸς ὀρθὰς ἡ ΔΖ, βάσις show that point F is the center of the circle circumscribed
ἄρα ἡ ΑΖ βάσει τῇ ΒΖ ἐστιν ἴση. ὁμοίως δὴ δείξομεν, ὅτι about triangle ABC.
καὶ ἡ ΓΖ τῇ ΑΖ ἐστιν ἴση· ὥστε καὶ ἡ ΒΖ τῇ ΖΓ ἐστιν ἴση· And so, let DF and EF meet outside triangle ABC,
ὁ ἄρα [πάλιν] κέντρῳ τῷ Ζ διαστήματι δὲ ἑνὶ τῶν ΖΑ, ΖΒ, again at (point) F, like in the third diagram (from the
ΖΓ κύκλος γραφόμενος ἥξει καὶ διὰ τῶν λοιπῶν σημείων, left). And let AF, BF, and CF have been joined. And,
καὶ ἔσται περιγεγραμμένος περὶ τὸ ΑΒΓ τρίγωνον. again, since AD is equal to DB, and DF is common and
Περὶ τὸ δοθὲν ἄρα τρίγωνον κύκλος περιγέγραπται· at right-angles, the base AF is thus equal to the base BF
ὅπερ ἔδει ποιῆσαι. [Prop. 1.4]. So, similarly, we can show that CF is also
equal to AF. So that BF is also equal to FC. Thus,
114
STOIQEIWN dþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 4
[again] the circle drawn with center F, and radius one
of FA, FB, and FC, will also go through the remaining
points. And it will have been circumscribed about triangle ABC.
Thus, a circle has been circumscribed about the given
triangle. (Which is) the very thing it was required to do.
þ. Proposition 6
Εἰς τὸν δοθέντα κύκλον τετράγωνον ἐγγράψαι. To inscribe a square in a given circle.
Β
Α
Ε
Γ
∆
C
B
A
E D
῎Εστω ἡ δοθεὶς κύκλος ὁ ΑΒΓΔ· δεῖ δὴ εἰς τὸν ΑΒΓΔ Let ABCD be the given circle. So it is required to
κύκλον τετράγωνον ἐγγράψαι. inscribe a square in circle ABCD.
῎Ηχθωσαν τοῦ ΑΒΓΔ κύκλου δύο διάμετροι πρὸς ὀρθὰς Let two diameters of circle ABCD, AC and BD, have
ἀλλήλαις αἱ ΑΓ, ΒΔ, καὶ ἐπεζεύχθωσαν αἱ ΑΒ, ΒΓ, ΓΔ, been drawn at right-angles to one another.† And let AB,
ΔΑ. BC, CD, and DA have been joined.
Καὶ ἐπεὶ ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ΒΕ τῇ ΕΔ· κέντρον γὰρ τὸ Ε· κοινὴ And since BE is equal to ED, for E (is) the center
δὲ καὶ πρὸς ὀρθὰς ἡ ΕΑ, βάσις ἄρα ἡ ΑΒ βάσει τῇ ΑΔ ἴση (of the circle), and EA is common and at right-angles,
ἐστίν. διὰ τὰ αὐτὰ δὴ καὶ ἑκατέρα τῶν ΒΓ, ΓΔ ἑκατέρᾳ the base AB is thus equal to the base AD [Prop. 1.4].
τῶν ΑΒ, ΑΔ ἴση ἐστίν· ἰσόπλευρον ἄρα ἐστὶ τὸ ΑΒΓΔ So, for the same (reasons), each of BC and CD is equal
τετράπλευρον. λέγω δή, ὅτι καὶ ὀρθογώνιον. ἐπεὶ γὰρ ἡ to each of AB and AD. Thus, the quadrilateral ABCD
ΒΔ εὐθεῖα διάμετρός ἐστι τοῦ ΑΒΓΔ κύκλου, ἡμικύκλιον is equilateral. So I say that (it is) also right-angled. For
ἄρα ἐστὶ τὸ ΒΑΔ· ὀρθὴ ἄρα ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΑΔ γωνία. διὰ τὰ since the straight-line BD is a diameter of circle ABCD,
αὐτὰ δὴ καὶ ἑκάστη τῶν ὑπὸ ΑΒΓ, ΒΓΔ, ΓΔΑ ὀρθή ἐστιν· BAD is thus a semi-circle. Thus, angle BAD (is) a rightὀρθογώνιον ἄρα ἐστὶ τὸ ΑΒΓΔ τετράπλευρον. ἐδείχθη δὲ angle [Prop. 3.31]. So, for the same (reasons), (angles)
καὶ ἰσόπλευρον· τετράγωνον ἄρα ἐστίν. καὶ ἐγγέγραπται εἰς ABC, BCD, and CDA are also each right-angles. Thus,
τὸν ΑΒΓΔ κύκλον. the quadrilateral ABCD is right-angled. And it was also
Εἰς ἄρα τὸν δοθέντα κύκλον τετράγωνον ἐγγέγραπται shown (to be) equilateral. Thus, it is a square [Def. 1.22].
τὸ ΑΒΓΔ· ὅπερ ἔδει ποιῆσαι. And it has been inscribed in circle ABCD.
Thus, the square ABCD has been inscribed in the
given circle. (Which is) the very thing it was required
to do.
† Presumably, by finding the center of the circle [Prop. 3.1], drawing a line through it, and then drawing a second line through it, at right-angles
to the first [Prop. 1.11].
zþ. Proposition 7
Περὶ τὸν δοθέντα κύκλον τετράγωνον περιγράψαι. To circumscribe a square about a given circle.
115
STOIQEIWN dþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 4
῎Εστω ὁ δοθεὶς κύκλος ὁ ΑΒΓΔ· δεῖ δὴ περὶ τὸν ΑΒΓΔ Let ABCD be the given circle. So it is required to
κύκλον τετράγωνον περιγράψαι. circumscribe a square about circle ABCD.
Ε
Θ Γ Κ
Η Α Ζ
Β ∆ D
H C K
B
G A F
E
῎Ηχθωσαν τοῦ ΑΒΓΔ κύκλου δύο διάμετροι πρὸς ὀρθὰς Let two diameters of circle ABCD, AC and BD, have
ἀλλήλαις αἱ ΑΓ, ΒΔ, καὶ διὰ τῶν Α, Β, Γ, Δ σημείων ἤχθω- been drawn at right-angles to one another.† And let FG,
σαν ἐφαπτόμεναι τοῦ ΑΒΓΔ κύκλου αἱ ΖΗ, ΗΘ, ΘΚ, ΚΖ. GH, HK, and KF have been drawn through points A,
᾿Επεὶ οὖν ἐφάπτεται ἡ ΖΗ τοῦ ΑΒΓΔ κύκλου, ἀπὸ δὲ B, C, and D (respectively), touching circle ABCD.
‡
τοῦ Ε κέντρου ἐπὶ τὴν κατὰ τὸ Α ἐπαφὴν ἐπέζευκται ἡ Therefore, since FG touches circle ABCD, and EA
ΕΑ, αἱ ἄρα πρὸς τῷ Α γωνίαι ὀρθαί εἰσιν. διὰ τὰ αὐτὰ has been joined from the center E to the point of contact
δὴ καὶ αἱ πρὸς τοῖς Β, Γ, Δ σημείοις γωνίαι ὀρθαί εἰσιν. A, the angles at A are thus right-angles [Prop. 3.18]. So,
καὶ ἐπεὶ ὀρθή ἐστιν ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΕΒ γωνία, ἐστὶ δὲ ὀρθὴ καὶ ἡ for the same (reasons), the angles at points B, C, and
ὑπὸ ΕΒΗ, παράλληλος ἄρα ἐστὶν ἡ ΗΘ τῇ ΑΓ. διὰ τὰ αὐτὰ D are also right-angles. And since angle AEB is a rightδὴ καὶ ἡ ΑΓ τῇ ΖΚ ἐστι παράλληλος. ὥστε καὶ ἡ ΗΘ τῇ angle, and EBG is also a right-angle, GH is thus parallel
ΖΚ ἐστι παράλληλος. ὁμοίως δὴ δείξομεν, ὅτι καὶ ἑκατέρα to AC [Prop. 1.29]. So, for the same (reasons), AC is
τῶν ΗΖ, ΘΚ τῇ ΒΕΔ ἐστι παράλληλος. παραλληλόγραμμα also parallel to FK. So that GH is also parallel to FK
ἄρα ἐστὶ τὰ ΗΚ, ΗΓ, ΑΚ, ΖΒ, ΒΚ· ἴση ἄρα ἐστὶν ἡ μὲν [Prop. 1.30]. So, similarly, we can show that GF and
ΗΖ τῇ ΘΚ, ἡ δὲ ΗΘ τῇ ΖΚ. καὶ ἐπεὶ ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ΑΓ τῇ HK are each parallel to BED. Thus, GK, GC, AK, FB,
ΒΔ, ἀλλὰ καὶ ἡ μὲν ΑΓ ἑκατέρᾳ τῶν ΗΘ, ΖΚ, ἡ δὲ ΒΔ and BK are (all) parallelograms. Thus, GF is equal to
ἑκατέρᾳ τῶν ΗΖ, ΘΚ ἐστιν ἴση [καὶ ἑκατέρα ἄρα τῶν ΗΘ, HK, and GH to FK [Prop. 1.34]. And since AC is equal
ΖΚ ἑκατέρᾳ τῶν ΗΖ, ΘΚ ἐστιν ἴση], ἰσόπλευρον ἄρα ἐστὶ τὸ to BD, but AC (is) also (equal) to each of GH and FK,
ΖΗΘΚ τετράπλευρον. λέγω δή, ὅτι καὶ ὀρθογώνιον. ἐπεὶ and BD is equal to each of GF and HK [Prop. 1.34]
γὰρ παραλληλόγραμμόν ἐστι τὸ ΗΒΕΑ, καί ἐστιν ὀρθὴ ἡ [and each of GH and FK is thus equal to each of GF
ὑπὸ ΑΕΒ, ὀρθὴ ἄρα καὶ ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΗΒ. ὁμοίως δὴ δείξομεν, and HK], the quadrilateral FGHK is thus equilateral.
ὅτι καὶ αἱ πρὸς τοῖς Θ, Κ, Ζ γωνίαι ὀρθαί εἰσιν. ὀρθογώνιον So I say that (it is) also right-angled. For since GBEA
ἄρα ἐστὶ τὸ ΖΗΘΚ. ἐδείχθη δὲ καὶ ἰσόπλευρον· τετράγωνον is a parallelogram, and AEB is a right-angle, AGB is
ἄρα ἐστίν. καὶ περιγέγραπται περὶ τὸν ΑΒΓΔ κύκλον. thus also a right-angle [Prop. 1.34]. So, similarly, we can
Περὶ τὸν δοθέντα ἄρα κύκλον τετράγωνον περιγέγραπται· show that the angles at H, K, and F are also right-angles.
ὅπερ ἔδει ποιῆσαι. Thus, FGHK is right-angled. And it was also shown (to
be) equilateral. Thus, it is a square [Def. 1.22]. And it
has been circumscribed about circle ABCD.
Thus, a square has been circumscribed about the
given circle. (Which is) the very thing it was required
to do.
† See the footnote to the previous proposition.
‡ See the footnote to Prop. 3.34.
116
STOIQEIWN dþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 4
hþ. Proposition 8
Εἰς τὸ δοθὲν τετράγωνον κύκλον ἐγγράψαι. To inscribe a circle in a given square.
῎Εστω τὸ δοθὲν τετράγωνον τὸ ΑΒΓΔ. δεῖ δὴ εἰς τὸ Let the given square be ABCD. So it is required to
ΑΒΓΔ τετράγωνον κύκλον ἐγγράψαι. inscribe a circle in square ABCD.
Η
Α Ε ∆
Κ
Β Θ Γ
Ζ
G
A E D
F K
B H C
Τετμήσθω ἑκατέρα τῶν ΑΔ, ΑΒ δίχα κατὰ τὰ Ε, Ζ Let AD and AB each have been cut in half at points E
σημεῖα, καὶ διὰ μὲν τοῦ Ε ὁποτέρᾳ τῶν ΑΒ, ΓΔ παράλληλος and F (respectively) [Prop. 1.10]. And let EH have been
ἤχθω ὁ ΕΘ, διὰ δὲ τοῦ Ζ ὁποτέρᾳ τῶν ΑΔ, ΒΓ παράλληλος drawn through E, parallel to either of AB or CD, and let
ἤχθω ἡ ΖΚ· παραλληλόγραμμον ἄρα ἐστὶν ἕκαστον τῶν FK have been drawn through F, parallel to either of AD
ΑΚ, ΚΒ, ΑΘ, ΘΔ, ΑΗ, ΗΓ, ΒΗ, ΗΔ, καὶ αἱ ἀπεναντίον or BC [Prop. 1.31]. Thus, AK, KB, AH, HD, AG, GC,
αὐτῶν πλευραὶ δηλονότι ἴσαι [εἰσίν]. καὶ ἐπεὶ ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ BG, and GD are each parallelograms, and their opposite
ΑΔ τῇ ΑΒ, καί ἐστι τῆς μὲν ΑΔ ἡμίσεια ἡ ΑΕ, τῆς δὲ ΑΒ sides [are] manifestly equal [Prop. 1.34]. And since AD
ἡμίσεια ἡ ΑΖ, ἴση ἄρα καὶ ἡ ΑΕ τῇ ΑΖ· ὥστε καὶ αἱ ἀπε- is equal to AB, and AE is half of AD, and AF half of
ναντίον· ἴση ἄρα καὶ ἡ ΖΗ τῇ ΗΕ. ὁμοίως δὴ δείξομεν, ὅτι AB, AE (is) thus also equal to AF. So that the opposite
καὶ ἑκατέρα τῶν ΗΘ, ΗΚ ἑκατέρᾳ τῶν ΖΗ, ΗΕ ἐστιν ἴση· (sides are) also (equal). Thus, FG (is) also equal to GE.
αἱ τέσσαρες ἄρα αἱ ΗΕ, ΗΖ, ΗΘ, ΗΚ ἴσαι ἀλλήλαις [εἰσίν]. So, similarly, we can also show that each of GH and GK
ὁ ἄρα κέντρῳ μὲν τῷ Η διαστήματι δὲ ἑνὶ τῶν Ε, Ζ, Θ, Κ is equal to each of FG and GE. Thus, the four (straightκύκλος γραφόμενος ἥξει καὶ διὰ τῶν λοιπῶν σημείων· καὶ lines) GE, GF, GH, and GK [are] equal to one another.
ἐφάψεται τῶν ΑΒ, ΒΓ, ΓΔ, ΔΑ εὐθειῶν διὰ τὸ ὀρθὰς εἶναι Thus, the circle drawn with center G, and radius one of
τὰς πρὸς τοῖς Ε, Ζ, Θ, Κ γωνίας· εἰ γὰρ τεμεῖ ὁ κύκλος τὰς E, F, H, or K, will also go through the remaining points.
ΑΒ, ΒΓ, ΓΔ, ΔΑ, ἡ τῇ διαμέτρῳ τοῦ κύκλου πρὸς ὀρθὰς And it will touch the straight-lines AB, BC, CD, and
ἀπ᾿ ἄκρας ἀγομένη ἐντὸς πεσεῖται τοῦ κύκλου· ὅπερ ἄτοπον DA, on account of the angles at E, F, H, and K being
ἐδείχθη. οὐκ ἄρα ὁ κέντρῳ τῷ Η διαστήματι δὲ ἑνὶ τῶν Ε, right-angles. For if the circle cuts AB, BC, CD, or DA,
Ζ, Θ, Κ κύκλος γραφόμενος τεμεῖ τὰς ΑΒ, ΒΓ, ΓΔ, ΔΑ then a (straight-line) drawn at right-angles to a diameter
εὐθείας. ἐφάψεται ἄρα αὐτῶν καὶ ἔσται ἐγγεγραμμένος εἰς of the circle, from its extremity, will fall inside the circle.
τὸ ΑΒΓΔ τετράγωνον. The very thing was shown (to be) absurd [Prop. 3.16].
Εἰς ἄρα τὸ δοθὲν τετράγωνον κύκλος ἐγγέγραπται· Thus, the circle drawn with center G, and radius one of
ὅπερ ἔδει ποιῆσαι. E, F, H, or K, does not cut the straight-lines AB, BC,
CD, or DA. Thus, it will touch them, and will have been
inscribed in the square ABCD.
Thus, a circle has been inscribed in the given square.
(Which is) the very thing it was required to do.
jþ. Proposition 9
Περὶ τὸ δοθὲν τετράγωνον κύκλον περιγράψαι. To circumscribe a circle about a given square.
῎Εστω τὸ δοθὲν τετράγωνον τὸ ΑΒΓΔ· δεῖ δὴ περὶ τὸ Let ABCD be the given square. So it is required to
ΑΒΓΔ τετράγωνον κύκλον περιγράψαι. circumscribe a circle about square ABCD.
117
STOIQEIWN dþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 4
᾿Επιζευχθεῖσαι γὰρ αἱ ΑΓ, ΒΔ τεμνέτωσαν ἀλλήλας AC and BD being joined, let them cut one another at
κατὰ τὸ Ε. E.
Β
Α
Ε
Γ
∆
C
B
A
E D
Καὶ ἐπεὶ ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ΔΑ τῇ ΑΒ, κοινὴ δὲ ἡ ΑΓ, δύο And since DA is equal to AB, and AC (is) common,
δὴ αἱ ΔΑ, ΑΓ δυσὶ ταῖς ΒΑ, ΑΓ ἴσαι εἰσίν· καὶ βάσις ἡ the two (straight-lines) DA, AC are thus equal to the two
ΔΓ βάσει τῇ ΒΓ ἴση· γωνία ἄρα ἡ ὑπὸ ΔΑΓ γωνίᾳ τῇ ὑπὸ (straight-lines) BA, AC. And the base DC (is) equal to
ΒΑΓ ἴση ἐστίν· ἡ ἄρα ὑπὸ ΔΑΒ γωνία δίχα τέτμηται ὑπὸ the base BC. Thus, angle DAC is equal to angle BAC
τῆς ΑΓ. ὁμοίως δὴ δείξομεν, ὅτι καὶ ἑκάστη τῶν ὑπὸ ΑΒΓ, [Prop. 1.8]. Thus, the angle DAB has been cut in half
ΒΓΔ, ΓΔΑ δίχα τέτμηται ὑπὸ τῶν ΑΓ, ΔΒ εὐθειῶν. καὶ by AC. So, similarly, we can show that ABC, BCD, and
ἐπεὶ ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ὑπὸ ΔΑΒ γωνία τῇ ὑπὸ ΑΒΓ, καί ἐστι CDA have each been cut in half by the straight-lines AC
τῆς μὲν ὑπὸ ΔΑΒ ἡμίσεια ἡ ὑπὸ ΕΑΒ, τῆς δὲ ὑπὸ ΑΒΓ and DB. And since angle DAB is equal to ABC, and
ἡμίσεια ἡ ὑπὸ ΕΒΑ, καὶ ἡ ὑπὸ ΕΑΒ ἄρα τῇ ὑπὸ ΕΒΑ ἐστιν EAB is half of DAB, and EBA half of ABC, EAB is
ἴση· ὥστε καὶ πλευρὰ ἡ ΕΑ τῇ ΕΒ ἐστιν ἴση. ὁμοίως δὴ thus also equal to EBA. So that side EA is also equal
δείξομεν, ὅτι καὶ ἑκατέρα τῶν ΕΑ, ΕΒ [εὐθειῶν] ἑκατέρᾳ to EB [Prop. 1.6]. So, similarly, we can show that each
τῶν ΕΓ, ΕΔ ἴση ἐστίν. αἱ τέσσαρες ἄρα αἱ ΕΑ, ΕΒ, ΕΓ, of the [straight-lines] EA and EB are also equal to each
ΕΔ ἴσαι ἀλλήλαις εἰσίν. ὁ ἄρα κέντρῳ τῷ Ε καὶ διαστήματι of EC and ED. Thus, the four (straight-lines) EA, EB,
ἑνὶ τῶν Α, Β, Γ, Δ κύκλος γραφόμενος ἥξει καὶ διὰ τῶν EC, and ED are equal to one another. Thus, the circle
λοιπῶν σημείων καὶ ἔσται περιγεγραμμένος περὶ τὸ ΑΒΓΔ drawn with center E, and radius one of A, B, C, or D,
τετράγωνον. περιγεγράφθω ὡς ὁ ΑΒΓΔ. will also go through the remaining points, and will have
Περὶ τὸ δοθὲν ἄρα τετράγωνον κύκλος περιγέγραπται· been circumscribed about the square ABCD. Let it have
ὅπερ ἔδει ποιῆσαι. been (so) circumscribed, like ABCD (in the figure).
Thus, a circle has been circumscribed about the given
square. (Which is) the very thing it was required to do.
iþ. Proposition 10
᾿Ισοσκελὲς τρίγωνον συστήσασθαι ἔχον ἑκατέραν τῶν To construct an isosceles triangle having each of the
πρὸς τῇ βάσει γωνιῶν διπλασίονα τῆς λοιπῆς. angles at the base double the remaining (angle).
᾿Εκκείσθω τις εὐθεῖα ἡ ΑΒ, καὶ τετμήσθω κατὰ τὸ Let some straight-line AB be taken, and let it have
Γ σημεῖον, ὥστε τὸ ὑπὸ τῶν ΑΒ, ΒΓ περιεχόμενον been cut at point C so that the rectangle contained by
ὀρθογώνιον ἴσον εἶναι τῷ ἀπὸ τῆς ΓΑ τετραγώνῳ· καὶ AB and BC is equal to the square on CA [Prop. 2.11].
κέντρῳ τῷ Α καὶ διαστήματι τῷ ΑΒ κύκλος γεγράφθω And let the circle BDE have been drawn with center A,
ὁ ΒΔΕ, καὶ ἐνηρμόσθω εἰς τὸν ΒΔΕ κύκλον τῇ ΑΓ εὐθείᾳ and radius AB. And let the straight-line BD, equal to
μὴ μείζονι οὔσῃ τῆς τοῦ ΒΔΕ κύκλου διαμέτρου ἴση εὐθεῖα the straight-line AC, being not greater than the diameἡ ΒΔ· καὶ ἐπεζεύχθωσαν αἱ ΑΔ, ΔΓ, καὶ περιγεγράφθω ter of circle BDE, have been inserted into circle BDE
περὶ τὸ ΑΓΔ τρίγωνον κύκλος ὁ ΑΓΔ. [Prop. 4.1]. And let AD and DC have been joined. And
let the circle ACD have been circumscribed about triangle ACD [Prop. 4.5].
118
STOIQEIWN dþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 4
Α
Β
Ε
∆
Γ C
D
A
E
B
Καὶ ἐπεὶ τὸ ὑπὸ τῶν ΑΒ, ΒΓ ἴσον ἐστὶ τῷ ἀπὸ τῆς And since the (rectangle contained) by AB and BC
ΑΓ, ἴση δὲ ἡ ΑΓ τῇ ΒΔ, τὸ ἄρα ὑπὸ τῶν ΑΒ, ΒΓ ἴσον is equal to the (square) on AC, and AC (is) equal to
ἐστὶ τῷ ἀπὸ τῆς ΒΔ. καὶ ἐπεὶ κύκλου τοῦ ΑΓΔ εἴληπταί τι BD, the (rectangle contained) by AB and BC is thus
σημεῖον ἐκτὸς τὸ Β, καὶ ἀπὸ τοῦ Β πρὸς τὸν ΑΓΔ κύκλον equal to the (square) on BD. And since some point B
προσπεπτώκασι δύο εὐθεῖαι αἱ ΒΑ, ΒΔ, καὶ ἡ μὲν αὐτῶν has been taken outside of circle ACD, and two straightτέμνει, ἡ δὲ προσπίπτει, καί ἐστι τὸ ὑπὸ τῶν ΑΒ, ΒΓ ἴσον lines BA and BD have radiated from B towards the cirτῷ ἀπὸ τῆς ΒΔ, ἡ ΒΔ ἄρα ἐφάπτεται τοῦ ΑΓΔ κύκλου. ἐπεὶ cle ACD, and (one) of them cuts (the circle), and (the
οὖν ἐφάπτεται μὲν ἡ ΒΔ, ἀπὸ δὲ τῆς κατὰ τὸ Δ ἐπαφῆς other) meets (the circle), and the (rectangle contained)
διῆκται ἡ ΔΓ, ἡ ἄρα ὑπὸ ΒΔΓ γωνιά ἴση ἐστὶ τῇ ἐν τῷ by AB and BC is equal to the (square) on BD, BD thus
ἐναλλὰξ τοῦ κύκλου τμήματι γωνίᾳ τῇ ὑπὸ ΔΑΓ. ἐπεὶ οὖν touches circle ACD [Prop. 3.37]. Therefore, since BD
ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΔΓ τῇ ὑπὸ ΔΑΓ, κοινὴ προσκείσθω ἡ touches (the circle), and DC has been drawn across (the
ὑπὸ ΓΔΑ· ὅλη ἄρα ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΔΑ ἴση ἐστὶ δυσὶ ταῖς ὑπὸ ΓΔΑ, circle) from the point of contact D, the angle BDC is
ΔΑΓ. ἀλλὰ ταῖς ὑπὸ ΓΔΑ, ΔΑΓ ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ἐκτὸς ἡ ὑπὸ thus equal to the angle DAC in the alternate segment of
ΒΓΔ· καὶ ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΔΑ ἄρα ἴση ἐστὶ τῇ ὑπὸ ΒΓΔ. ἀλλὰ ἡ the circle [Prop. 3.32]. Therefore, since BDC is equal
ὑπὸ ΒΔΑ τῇ ὑπὸ ΓΒΔ ἐστιν ἴση, ἐπεὶ καὶ πλευρὰ ἡ ΑΔ to DAC, let CDA have been added to both. Thus, the
τῇ ΑΒ ἐστιν ἴση· ὥστε καὶ ἡ ὑπὸ ΔΒΑ τῇ ὑπὸ ΒΓΔ ἐστιν whole of BDA is equal to the two (angles) CDA and
ἴση. αἱ τρεῖς ἄρα αἱ ὑπὸ ΒΔΑ, ΔΒΑ, ΒΓΑ ἴσαι ἀλλήλαις DAC. But, the external (angle) BCD is equal to CDA
εἰσίν. καὶ ἐπεὶ ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ὑπὸ ΔΒΓ γωνία τῇ ὑπὸ ΒΓΔ, and DAC [Prop. 1.32]. Thus, BDA is also equal to
ἴση ἐστὶ καὶ πλευρὰ ἡ ΒΔ πλευρᾷ τῇ ΔΓ. ἀλλὰ ἡ ΒΔ τῇ BCD. But, BDA is equal to CBD, since the side AD is
ΓΑ ὑπόκειται ἴση· καὶ ἡ ΓΑ ἄρα τῇ ΓΔ ἐστιν ἴση· ὥστε καὶ also equal to AB [Prop. 1.5]. So that DBA is also equal
γωνία ἡ ὑπὸ ΓΔΑ γωνίᾳ τῇ ὑπὸ ΔΑΓ ἐστιν ἴση· αἱ ἄρα to BCD. Thus, the three (angles) BDA, DBA, and BCD
ὑπὸ ΓΔΑ, ΔΑΓ τῆς ὑπὸ ΔΑΓ εἰσι διπλασίους. ἴση δὲ ἡ are equal to one another. And since angle DBC is equal
ὑπὸ ΒΓΔ ταῖς ὑπὸ ΓΔΑ, ΔΑΓ· καὶ ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΓΔ ἄρα τῆς ὑπὸ to BCD, side BD is also equal to side DC [Prop. 1.6].
ΓΑΔ ἐστι διπλῆ. ἴση δὲ ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΓΔ ἑκατέρᾳ τῶν ὑπὸ ΒΔΑ, But, BD was assumed (to be) equal to CA. Thus, CA
ΔΒΑ· καὶ ἑκατέρα ἄρα τῶν ὑπὸ ΒΔΑ, ΔΒΑ τῆς ὑπὸ ΔΑΒ is also equal to CD. So that angle CDA is also equal to
ἐστι διπλῆ. angle DAC [Prop. 1.5]. Thus, CDA and DAC is double
᾿Ισοσκελὲς ἄρα τρίγωνον συνέσταται τὸ ΑΒΔ ἔχον DAC. But BCD (is) equal to CDA and DAC. Thus,
ἑκατέραν τῶν πρὸς τῇ ΔΒ βάσει γωνιῶν διπλασίονα τῆς BCD is also double CAD. And BCD (is) equal to to
λοιπῆς· ὅπερ ἔδει ποιῆσαι. each of BDA and DBA. Thus, BDA and DBA are each
double DAB.
Thus, the isosceles triangle ABD has been constructed having each of the angles at the base BD double
the remaining (angle). (Which is) the very thing it was
required to do.
iaþ. Proposition 11
Εἰς τὸν δοθέντα κύκλον πεντάγωνον ἰσόπλευρόν τε καὶ To inscribe an equilateral and equiangular pentagon
119
STOIQEIWN dþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 4
ἰσογώνιον ἐγγράψαι. in a given circle.
Γ
Ζ
∆ Θ
Ε
Α
Η
Β
D
A
B
C
F
G H
E
῎Εστω ὁ δοθεὶς κύκλος ὁ ΑΒΓΔΕ· δεῖ δὴ εἰς τὸν Let ABCDE be the given circle. So it is required to
ΑΒΓΔΕ κύκλον πεντάγωνον ἰσόπλευρόν τε καὶ ἰσογώνιον inscribed an equilateral and equiangular pentagon in cirἐγγράψαι. cle ABCDE.
᾿Εκκείσθω τρίγωνον ἰσοσκελὲς τὸ ΖΗΘ διπλασίονα Let the the isosceles triangle FGH be set up havἔχον ἑκατέραν τῶν πρὸς τοῖς Η, Θ γωνιῶν τῆς πρὸς τῷ Ζ, ing each of the angles at G and H double the (angle)
καὶ ἐγγεγράφθω εἰς τὸν ΑΒΓΔΕ κύκλον τῷ ΖΗΘ τριγώνῳ at F [Prop. 4.10]. And let triangle ACD, equiangular
ἰσογώνιον τρίγωνον τὸ ΑΓΔ, ὥστε τῇ μὲν πρὸς τῷ Ζ γωνίᾳ to FGH, have been inscribed in circle ABCDE, such
ἴσην εἶναι τὴν ὑπὸ ΓΑΔ, ἑκατέραν δὲ τῶν πρὸς τοῖς Η, Θ that CAD is equal to the angle at F, and the (angles)
ἴσην ἑκατέρᾳ τῶν ὑπὸ ΑΓΔ, ΓΔΑ· καὶ ἑκατέρα ἄρα τῶν at G and H (are) equal to ACD and CDA, respectively
ὑπὸ ΑΓΔ, ΓΔΑ τῆς ὑπὸ ΓΑΔ ἐστι διπλῆ. τετμήσθω δὴ [Prop. 4.2]. Thus, ACD and CDA are each double
ἑκατέρα τῶν ὑπὸ ΑΓΔ, ΓΔΑ δίχα ὑπὸ ἑκατέρας τῶν ΓΕ, CAD. So let ACD and CDA have been cut in half by
ΔΒ εὐθειῶν, καὶ ἐπεζεύχθωσαν αἱ ΑΒ, ΒΓ, ΔΕ, ΕΑ. the straight-lines CE and DB, respectively [Prop. 1.9].
᾿Επεὶ οὖν ἑκατέρα τῶν ὑπὸ ΑΓΔ, ΓΔΑ γωνιῶν δι- And let AB, BC, DE and EA have been joined.
πλασίων ἐστὶ τῆς ὑπὸ ΓΑΔ, καὶ τετμημέναι εἰσὶ δίχα ὑπὸ Therefore, since angles ACD and CDA are each douτῶν ΓΕ, ΔΒ εὐθειῶν, αἱ πέντε ἄρα γωνίαι αἱ ὑπὸ ΔΑΓ, ble CAD, and are cut in half by the straight-lines CE and
ΑΓΕ, ΕΓΔ, ΓΔΒ, ΒΔΑ ἴσαι ἀλλήλαις εἰσίν. αἱ δὲ ἴσαι DB, the five angles DAC, ACE, ECD, CDB, and BDA
γωνίαι ἐπὶ ἴσων περιφερειῶν βεβήκασιν· αἱ πέντε ἄρα πε- are thus equal to one another. And equal angles stand
ριφέρειαι αἱ ΑΒ, ΒΓ, ΓΔ, ΔΕ, ΕΑ ἴσαι ἀλλήλαις εἰσίν. ὑπὸ upon equal circumferences [Prop. 3.26]. Thus, the five
δὲ τὰς ἴσας περιφερείας ἴσαι εὐθεῖαι ὑποτείνουσιν· αἱ πέντε circumferences AB, BC, CD, DE, and EA are equal to
ἄρα εὐθεῖαι αἱ ΑΒ, ΒΓ, ΓΔ, ΔΕ, ΕΑ ἴσαι ἀλλήλαις εἰσίν· one another [Prop. 3.29]. Thus, the pentagon ABCDE
ἰσόπλευρον ἄρα ἐστὶ τὸ ΑΒΓΔΕ πεντάγωνον. λέγω δή, is equilateral. So I say that (it is) also equiangular. For
ὅτι καὶ ἰσογώνιον. ἐπεὶ γὰρ ἡ ΑΒ περιφέρεια τῇ ΔΕ πε- since the circumference AB is equal to the circumferριφερείᾳ ἐστὶν ἴση, κοινὴ προσκείσθω ἡ ΒΓΔ· ὅλη ἄρα ἡ ence DE, let BCD have been added to both. Thus, the
ΑΒΓΔ περιφέρια ὅλῃ τῇ ΕΔΓΒ περιφερείᾳ ἐστὶν ἴση. καὶ whole circumference ABCD is equal to the whole cirβέβηκεν ἐπὶ μὲν τῆς ΑΒΓΔ περιφερείας γωνία ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΕΔ, cumference EDCB. And the angle AED stands upon
ἐπὶ δὲ τῆς ΕΔΓΒ περιφερείας γωνία ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΑΕ· καὶ ἡ ὑπὸ circumference ABCD, and angle BAE upon circumferΒΑΕ ἄρα γωνία τῇ ὑπὸ ΑΕΔ ἐστιν ἴση. διὰ τὰ αὐτὰ δὴ ence EDCB. Thus, angle BAE is also equal to AED
καὶ ἑκάστη τῶν ὑπὸ ΑΒΓ, ΒΓΔ, ΓΔΕ γωνιῶν ἑκατέρᾳ τῶν [Prop. 3.27]. So, for the same (reasons), each of the anὑπὸ ΒΑΕ, ΑΕΔ ἐστιν ἴση· ἰσογώνιον ἄρα ἐστὶ τὸ ΑΒΓΔΕ gles ABC, BCD, and CDE is also equal to each of BAE
πεντάγωνον. ἐδείχθη δὲ καὶ ἰσόπλευρον. and AED. Thus, pentagon ABCDE is equiangular. And
Εἰς ἄρα τὸν δοθέντα κύκλον πεντάγωνον ἰσόπλευρόν τε it was also shown (to be) equilateral.
καὶ ἰσογώνιον ἐγγέγραπται· ὅπερ ἔδει ποιῆσαι. Thus, an equilateral and equiangular pentagon has
been inscribed in the given circle. (Which is) the very
thing it was required to do.
ibþ. Proposition 12
Περὶ τὸν δοθέντα κύκλον πεντάγωνον ἰσόπλευρόν τε To circumscribe an equilateral and equiangular penκαὶ ἰσογώνιον περιγράψαι. tagon about a given circle.
120
STOIQEIWN dþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 4
Θ
Κ Γ Λ
Β ∆
Η
Μ
Ζ
Α Ε
H
A
B
K C L
D
F
G
E
M
῎Εστω ὁ δοθεὶς κύκλος ὁ ΑΒΓΔΕ· δεῖ δὲ περὶ τὸν Let ABCDE be the given circle. So it is required
ΑΒΓΔΕ κύκλον πεντάγωνον ἰσόπλευρόν τε καὶ ἰσογώνιον to circumscribe an equilateral and equiangular pentagon
περιγράψαι. about circle ABCDE.
Νενοήσθω τοῦ ἐγγεγραμμένου πενταγώνου τῶν γωνιῶν Let A, B, C, D, and E have been conceived as the anσημεῖα τὰ Α, Β, Γ, Δ, Ε, ὥστε ἴσας εἶναι τὰς ΑΒ, ΒΓ, gular points of a pentagon having been inscribed (in cirΓΔ, ΔΕ, ΕΑ περιφερείας· καὶ διὰ τῶν Α, Β, Γ, Δ, Ε cle ABCDE) [Prop. 3.11], such that the circumferences
ἤχθωσαν τοῦ κύκλου ἐφαπτόμεναι αἱ ΗΘ, ΘΚ, ΚΛ, ΛΜ, AB, BC, CD, DE, and EA are equal. And let GH, HK,
ΜΗ, καὶ εἰλήφθω τοῦ ΑΒΓΔΕ κύκλου κέντρον τὸ Ζ, καὶ KL, LM, and MG have been drawn through (points) A,
ἐπεζεύχθωσαν αἱ ΖΒ, ΖΚ, ΖΓ, ΖΛ, ΖΔ. B, C, D, and E (respectively), touching the circle.† And
Καὶ ἐπεὶ ἡ μὲν ΚΛ εὐθεῖα ἐφάπτεται τοῦ ΑΒΓΔΕ κατὰ let the center F of the circle ABCDE have been found
τὸ Γ, ἀπὸ δὲ τοῦ Ζ κέντρου ἐπὶ τὴν κατὰ τὸ Γ ἐπαφὴν [Prop. 3.1]. And let FB, FK, FC, FL, and FD have
ἐπέζευκται ἡ ΖΓ, ἡ ΖΓ ἄρα κάθετός ἐστιν ἐπὶ τὴν ΚΛ· ὀρθὴ been joined.
ἄρα ἐστὶν ἑκατέρα τῶν πρὸς τῷ Γ γωνιῶν. διὰ τὰ αὐτὰ δὴ And since the straight-line KL touches (circle) ABCDE
καὶ αἱ πρὸς τοῖς Β, Δ σημείοις γωνίαι ὀρθαί εἰσιν. καὶ ἐπεὶ at C, and FC has been joined from the center F to the
ὀρθή ἐστιν ἡ ὑπὸ ΖΓΚ γωνία, τὸ ἄρα ἀπὸ τῆς ΖΚ ἴσον ἐστὶ point of contact C, FC is thus perpendicular to KL
τοῖς ἀπὸ τῶν ΖΓ, ΓΚ. διὰ τὰ αὐτὰ δὴ καὶ τοῖς ἀπὸ τῶν ΖΒ, [Prop. 3.18]. Thus, each of the angles at C is a rightΒΚ ἴσον ἐστὶ τὸ ἀπὸ τῆς ΖΚ· ὥστε τὰ ἀπὸ τῶν ΖΓ, ΓΚ angle. So, for the same (reasons), the angles at B and
τοῖς ἀπὸ τῶν ΖΒ, ΒΚ ἐστιν ἴσα, ὧν τὸ ἀπὸ τῆς ΖΓ τῷ ἀπὸ D are also right-angles. And since angle FCK is a rightτῆς ΖΒ ἐστιν ἴσον· λοιπὸν ἄρα τὸ ἀπὸ τῆς ΓΚ τῷ ἀπὸ τῆς angle, the (square) on FK is thus equal to the (sum of
ΒΚ ἐστιν ἴσον. ἴση ἄρα ἡ ΒΚ τῇ ΓΚ. καὶ ἐπεὶ ἴση ἐστὶν the squares) on FC and CK [Prop. 1.47]. So, for the
ἡ ΖΒ τῇ ΖΓ, καὶ κοινὴ ἡ ΖΚ, δύο δὴ αἱ ΒΖ, ΖΚ δυσὶ ταῖς same (reasons), the (square) on FK is also equal to the
ΓΖ, ΖΚ ἴσαι εἰσίν· καὶ βάσις ἡ ΒΚ βάσει τῇ ΓΚ [ἐστιν] ἴση· (sum of the squares) on FB and BK. So that the (sum
γωνία ἄρα ἡ μὲν ὑπὸ ΒΖΚ [γωνίᾳ] τῇ ὑπὸ ΚΖΓ ἐστιν ἴση· of the squares) on FC and CK is equal to the (sum of
ἡ δὲ ὑπὸ ΒΚΖ τῇ ὑπὸ ΖΚΓ· διπλῆ ἄρα ἡ μὲν ὑπὸ ΒΖΓ τῆς the squares) on FB and BK, of which the (square) on
ὑπὸ ΚΖΓ, ἡ δὲ ὑπὸ ΒΚΓ τῆς ὑπὸ ΖΚΓ. διὰ τὰ αὐτὰ δὴ καὶ FC is equal to the (square) on FB. Thus, the remainἡ μὲν ὑπὸ ΓΖΔ τῆς ὑπὸ ΓΖΛ ἐστι διπλῆ, ἡ δὲ ὑπὸ ΔΛΓ ing (square) on CK is equal to the remaining (square)
τῆς ὑπὸ ΖΛΓ. καὶ ἐπεὶ ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ΒΓ περιφέρεια τῇ ΓΔ, on BK. Thus, BK (is) equal to CK. And since FB is
ἴση ἐστὶ καὶ γωνία ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΖΓ τῇ ὑπὸ ΓΖΔ. καί ἐστιν ἡ equal to FC, and FK (is) common, the two (straightμὲν ὑπὸ ΒΖΓ τῆς ὑπὸ ΚΖΓ διπλῆ, ἡ δὲ ὑπὸ ΔΖΓ τῆς ὑπὸ lines) BF, FK are equal to the two (straight-lines) CF,
ΛΖΓ· ἴση ἄρα καὶ ἡ ὑπὸ ΚΖΓ τῇ ὑπὸ ΛΖΓ· ἐστὶ δὲ καὶ ἡ FK. And the base BK [is] equal to the base CK. Thus,
ὑπὸ ΖΓΚ γωνία τῇ ὑπὸ ΖΓΛ ἴση. δύο δὴ τρίγωνά ἐστι τὰ angle BFK is equal to [angle] KFC [Prop. 1.8]. And
ΖΚΓ, ΖΛΓ τὰς δύο γωνίας ταῖς δυσὶ γωνίαις ἴσας ἔχοντα BKF (is equal) to FKC [Prop. 1.8]. Thus, BFC (is)
καὶ μίαν πλευρὰν μιᾷ πλευρᾷ ἴσην κοινὴν αὐτῶν τὴν ΖΓ· double KFC, and BKC (is double) FKC. So, for the
καὶ τὰς λοιπὰς ἄρα πλευρὰς ταῖς λοιπαῖς πλευραῖς ἴσας ἕξει same (reasons), CFD is also double CFL, and DLC (is
καὶ τὴν λοιπὴν γωνίαν τῇ λοιπῇ γωνίᾳ· ἴση ἄρα ἡ μὲν ΚΓ also double) FLC. And since circumference BC is equal
εὐθεῖα τῇ ΓΛ, ἡ δὲ ὑπὸ ΖΚΓ γωνία τῇ ὑπὸ ΖΛΓ. καὶ ἐπεὶ ἴση to CD, angle BFC is also equal to CFD [Prop. 3.27].
ἐστὶν ἡ ΚΓ τῇ ΓΛ, διπλῆ ἄρα ἡ ΚΛ τῆς ΚΓ. διὰ τὰ αὐτα δὴ And BFC is double KFC, and DFC (is double) LFC.
δειχθήσεται καὶ ἡ ΘΚ τῆς ΒΚ διπλῆ. καί ἐστιν ἡ ΒΚ τῇ ΚΓ Thus, KFC is also equal to LFC. And angle FCK is also
ἴση· καὶ ἡ ΘΚ ἄρα τῇ ΚΛ ἐστιν ἴση. ὁμοίως δὴ δειχθήσεται equal to FCL. So, FKC and FLC are two triangles hav121
STOIQEIWN dþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 4
καὶ ἑκάστη τῶν ΘΗ, ΗΜ, ΜΛ ἑκατέρᾳ τῶν ΘΚ, ΚΛ ἴση· ing two angles equal to two angles, and one side equal
ἰσόπλευρον ἄρα ἐστὶ τὸ ΗΘΚΛΜ πεντάγωνον. λέγω δή, to one side, (namely) their common (side) FC. Thus,
ὅτι καὶ ἰσογώνιον. ἐπεὶ γὰρ ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ὑπὸ ΖΚΓ γωνία τῇ they will also have the remaining sides equal to the (corὑπὸ ΖΛΓ, καὶ ἐδείχθη τῆς μὲν ὑπὸ ΖΚΓ διπλῆ ἡ ὑπὸ ΘΚΛ, responding) remaining sides, and the remaining angle to
τῆς δὲ ὑπὸ ΖΛΓ διπλῆ ἡ ὑπὸ ΚΛΜ, καὶ ἡ ὑπὸ ΘΚΛ ἄρα the remaining angle [Prop. 1.26]. Thus, the straight-line
τῇ ὑπὸ ΚΛΜ ἐστιν ἴση. ὁμοίως δὴ δειχθήσεται καὶ ἑκάστη KC (is) equal to CL, and the angle FKC to FLC. And
τῶν ὑπὸ ΚΘΗ, ΘΗΜ, ΗΜΛ ἑκατέρᾳ τῶν ὑπὸ ΘΚΛ, ΚΛΜ since KC is equal to CL, KL (is) thus double KC. So,
ἴση· αἱ πέντε ἄρα γωνίαι αἱ ὑπὸ ΗΘΚ, ΘΚΛ, ΚΛΜ, ΛΜΗ, for the same (reasons), it can be shown that HK (is) also
ΜΗΘ ἴσαι ἀλλήλαις εἰσίν. ἰσογώνιον ἄρα ἐστὶ τὸ ΗΘΚΛΜ double BK. And BK is equal to KC. Thus, HK is also
πεντάγωνον. ἐδείχθη δὲ καὶ ἰσόπλευρον, καὶ περιγέγραπται equal to KL. So, similarly, each of HG, GM, and ML
περὶ τὸν ΑΒΓΔΕ κύκλον. can also be shown (to be) equal to each of HK and KL.
[Περὶ τὸν δοθέντα ἄρα κύκλον πεντάγωνον ἰσόπλευρόν Thus, pentagon GHKLM is equilateral. So I say that
τε καὶ ἰσογώνιον περιγέγραπται]· ὅπερ ἔδει ποιῆσαι. (it is) also equiangular. For since angle FKC is equal to
FLC, and HKL was shown (to be) double FKC, and
KLM double FLC, HKL is thus also equal to KLM.
So, similarly, each of KHG, HGM, and GML can also
be shown (to be) equal to each of HKL and KLM. Thus,
the five angles GHK, HKL, KLM, LMG, and MGH
are equal to one another. Thus, the pentagon GHKLM
is equiangular. And it was also shown (to be) equilateral,
and has been circumscribed about circle ABCDE.
[Thus, an equilateral and equiangular pentagon has
been circumscribed about the given circle]. (Which is)
the very thing it was required to do.
† See the footnote to Prop. 3.34.
igþ. Proposition 13
Εἰς τὸ δοθὲν πεντάγωνον, ὅ ἐστιν ἰσόπλευρόν τε καὶ To inscribe a circle in a given pentagon, which is equiἰσογώνιον, κύκλον ἐγγράψαι. lateral and equiangular.
Η
Α
Γ Κ ∆
Λ
Ε
Μ
Ζ
Β
Θ H
A
G
B
C K D
L
E
M
F
῎Εστω τὸ δοθὲν πεντάγωνον ἰσόπλευρόν τε καὶ ἰσογώνι- Let ABCDE be the given equilateral and equiangular
ον τὸ ΑΒΓΔΕ· δεῖ δὴ εἰς τὸ ΑΒΓΔΕ πεντάγωνον κύκλον pentagon. So it is required to inscribe a circle in pentagon
ἐγγράψαι. ABCDE.
Τετμήσθω γὰρ ἑκατέρα τῶν ὑπὸ ΒΓΔ, ΓΔΕ γωνιῶν For let angles BCD and CDE have each been cut
δίχα ὑπὸ ἑκατέρας τῶν ΓΖ, ΔΖ εὐθειῶν· καὶ ἀπὸ τοῦ Ζ in half by each of the straight-lines CF and DF (reσημείου, καθ᾿ ὃ συμβάλλουσιν ἀλλήλαις αἱ ΓΖ, ΔΖ εὐθεῖαι, spectively) [Prop. 1.9]. And from the point F, at which
ἐπεζεύχθωσαν αἱ ΖΒ, ΖΑ, ΖΕ εὐθεῖαι. καὶ ἐπεὶ ἴση ἐστὶν the straight-lines CF and DF meet one another, let the
122
STOIQEIWN dþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 4
ἡ ΒΓ τῇ ΓΔ, κοινὴ δὲ ἡ ΓΖ, δύο δὴ αἱ ΒΓ, ΓΖ δυσὶ ταῖς straight-lines FB, FA, and FE have been joined. And
ΔΓ, ΓΖ ἴσαι εἰσίν· καὶ γωνία ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΓΖ γωνίᾳ τῇ ὑπὸ since BC is equal to CD, and CF (is) common, the two
ΔΓΖ [ἐστιν] ἴση· βάσις ἄρα ἡ ΒΖ βάσει τῇ ΔΖ ἐστιν ἴση, (straight-lines) BC, CF are equal to the two (straightκαὶ τὸ ΒΓΖ τρίγωνον τῷ ΔΓΖ τριγώνῳ ἐστιν ἴσον, καὶ αἱ lines) DC, CF. And angle BCF [is] equal to angle
λοιπαὶ γωνίαι ταῖς λοιπαῖς γωνίαις ἴσαι ἔσονται, ὑφ᾿ ἃς αἱ DCF. Thus, the base BF is equal to the base DF, and
ἴσαι πλευραὶ ὑποτείνουσιν· ἴση ἄρα ἡ ὑπὸ ΓΒΖ γωνία τῇ triangle BCF is equal to triangle DCF, and the remainὑπὸ ΓΔΖ. καὶ ἐπεὶ διπλῆ ἐστιν ἡ ὑπὸ ΓΔΕ τῆς ὑπὸ ΓΔΖ, ing angles will be equal to the (corresponding) remainἴση δὲ ἡ μὲν ὑπὸ ΓΔΕ τῇ ὑπὸ ΑΒΓ, ἡ δὲ ὑπὸ ΓΔΖ τῇ ὑπὸ ing angles which the equal sides subtend [Prop. 1.4].
ΓΒΖ, καὶ ἡ ὑπὸ ΓΒΑ ἄρα τῆς ὑπὸ ΓΒΖ ἐστι διπλῆ· ἴση Thus, angle CBF (is) equal to CDF. And since CDE
ἄρα ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΒΖ γωνία τῇ ὑπὸ ΖΒΓ· ἡ ἄρα ὑπὸ ΑΒΓ γωνία is double CDF, and CDE (is) equal to ABC, and CDF
δίχα τέτμηται ὑπὸ τῆς ΒΖ εὐθείας. ὁμοίως δὴ δειχθήσεται, to CBF, CBA is thus also double CBF. Thus, angle
ὅτι καὶ ἑκατέρα τῶν ὑπὸ ΒΑΕ, ΑΕΔ δίχα τέτμηται ὑπὸ ABF is equal to FBC. Thus, angle ABC has been cut
ἑκατέρας τῶν ΖΑ, ΖΕ εὐθειῶν. ἤχθωσαν δὴ ἀπὸ τοῦ Ζ in half by the straight-line BF. So, similarly, it can be
σημείου ἐπὶ τὰς ΑΒ, ΒΓ, ΓΔ, ΔΕ, ΕΑ εὐθείας κάθετοι shown that BAE and AED have been cut in half by the
αἱ ΖΗ, ΖΘ, ΖΚ, ΖΛ, ΖΜ. καὶ ἐπεὶ ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ὑπὸ ΘΓΖ straight-lines FA and FE, respectively. So let FG, FH,
γωνία τῇ ὑπὸ ΚΓΖ, ἐστὶ δὲ καὶ ὀρθὴ ἡ ὑπὸ ΖΘΓ [ὀρθῇ] FK, FL, and FM have been drawn from point F, perτῇ ὑπὸ ΖΚΓ ἴση, δύο δὴ τρίγωνά ἐστι τὰ ΖΘΓ, ΖΚΓ τὰς pendicular to the straight-lines AB, BC, CD, DE, and
δύο γωνίας δυσὶ γωνίαις ἴσας ἔχοντα καὶ μίαν πλευρὰν μιᾷ EA (respectively) [Prop. 1.12]. And since angle HCF
πλευρᾷ ἴσην κοινὴν αὐτῶν τὴν ΖΓ ὑποτείνουσαν ὑπὸ μίαν is equal to KCF, and the right-angle FHC is also equal
τῶν ἴσων γωνιῶν· καὶ τὰς λοιπὰς ἄρα πλευρὰς ταῖς λοιπαῖς to the [right-angle] FKC, FHC and FKC are two triπλευραῖς ἴσας ἕξει· ἴση ἄρα ἡ ΖΘ κάθετος τῂ ΖΚ καθέτῳ. angles having two angles equal to two angles, and one
ὁμοίως δὴ δειχθήσεται, ὅτι καὶ ἑκάστη τῶν ΖΛ, ΖΜ, ΖΗ side equal to one side, (namely) their common (side) FC,
ἑκατέρᾳ τῶν ΖΘ, ΖΚ ἴση ἐστίν· αἱ πέντε ἄρα εὐθεῖαι αἱ ΖΗ, subtending one of the equal angles. Thus, they will also
ΖΘ, ΖΚ, ΖΛ, ΖΜ ἴσαι ἀλλήλαις εἰσίν. ὁ ἄρα κέντρῳ τῷ Ζ have the remaining sides equal to the (corresponding)
διαστήματι δὲ ἑνὶ τῶν Η, Θ, Κ, Λ, Μ κύκλος γραφόμενος remaining sides [Prop. 1.26]. Thus, the perpendicular
ἥξει καὶ διὰ τῶν λοιπῶν σημείων καὶ ἐφάψεται τῶν ΑΒ, ΒΓ, FH (is) equal to the perpendicular FK. So, similarly, it
ΓΔ, ΔΕ, ΕΑ εὐθειῶν διὰ τὸ ὀρθὰς εἶναι τὰς πρὸς τοῖς Η, can be shown that FL, FM, and FG are each equal to
Θ, Κ, Λ, Μ σημείοις γωνίας. εἰ γὰρ οὐκ ἐφάψεται αὐτῶν, each of FH and FK. Thus, the five straight-lines FG,
ἀλλὰ τεμεῖ αὐτάς, συμβήσεται τὴν τῇ διαμέτρῳ τοῦ κύκλου FH, FK, FL, and FM are equal to one another. Thus,
πρὸς ὀρθὰς ἀπ᾿ ἄκρας ἀγομένην ἐντὸς πίπτειν τοῦ κύκλου· the circle drawn with center F, and radius one of G, H,
ὅπερ ἄτοπον ἐδείχθη. οὐκ ἄρα ὁ κέντρῳ τῷ Ζ διαστήματι δὲ K, L, or M, will also go through the remaining points,
ἑνὶ τῶν Η, Θ, Κ, Λ, Μ σημείων γραφόμενος κύκλος τεμεῖ and will touch the straight-lines AB, BC, CD, DE, and
τὰς ΑΒ, ΒΓ, ΓΔ, ΔΕ, ΕΑ εὐθείας· ἐφάψεται ἄρα αὐτῶν. EA, on account of the angles at points G, H, K, L, and
γεγράφθω ὡς ὁ ΗΘΚΛΜ. M being right-angles. For if it does not touch them, but
Εἰς ἄρα τὸ δοθὲν πεντάγωνον, ὅ ἐστιν ἰσόπλευρόν τε cuts them, it follows that a (straight-line) drawn at rightκαὶ ἰσογώνιον, κύκλος ἐγγέγραπται· ὅπερ ἔδει ποιῆσαι. angles to the diameter of the circle, from its extremity,
falls inside the circle. The very thing was shown (to be)
absurd [Prop. 3.16]. Thus, the circle drawn with center
F, and radius one of G, H, K, L, or M, does not cut
the straight-lines AB, BC, CD, DE, or EA. Thus, it will
touch them. Let it have been drawn, like GHKLM (in
the figure).
Thus, a circle has been inscribed in the given pentagon which is equilateral and equiangular. (Which is)
the very thing it was required to do.
idþ. Proposition 14
Περὶ τὸ δοθὲν πεντάγωνον, ὅ ἐστιν ἰσόπλευρόν τε καὶ To circumscribe a circle about a given pentagon which
ἰσογώνιον, κύκλον περιγράψαι. is equilateral and equiangular.
῎Εστω τὸ δοθὲν πεντάγωνον, ὅ ἐστιν ἰσόπλευρόν τε καὶ Let ABCDE be the given pentagon which is equilat123
STOIQEIWN dþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 4
ἰσογώνιον, τὸ ΑΒΓΔΕ· δεῖ δὴ περὶ τὸ ΑΒΓΔΕ πεντάγωνον eral and equiangular. So it is required to circumscribe a
κύκλον περιγράψαι. circle about the pentagon ABCDE.
Ζ
Α
Ε
∆
Β
Γ
F
A
B
C D
E
Τετμήσθω δὴ ἑκατέρα τῶν ὑπὸ ΒΓΔ, ΓΔΕ γωνιῶν So let angles BCD and CDE have been cut in half by
δίχα ὑπὸ ἑκατέρας τῶν ΓΖ, ΔΖ, καὶ ἀπὸ τοῦ Ζ σημείου, the (straight-lines) CF and DF, respectively [Prop. 1.9].
καθ᾿ ὃ συμβάλλουσιν αἱ εὐθεῖαι, ἐπὶ τὰ Β, Α, Ε σημεῖα And let the straight-lines FB, FA, and FE have been
ἐπεζεύχθωσαν εὐθεῖαι αἱ ΖΒ, ΖΑ, ΖΕ. ὁμοίως δὴ τῷ πρὸ joined from point F, at which the straight-lines meet,
τούτου δειχθήσεται, ὅτι καὶ ἑκάστη τῶν ὑπὸ ΓΒΑ, ΒΑΕ, to the points B, A, and E (respectively). So, similarly,
ΑΕΔ γωνιῶν δίχα τέτμηται ὑπὸ ἑκάστης τῶν ΖΒ, ΖΑ, ΖΕ to the (proposition) before this (one), it can be shown
εὐθειῶν. καὶ ἐπεὶ ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΓΔ γωνία τῇ ὑπὸ ΓΔΕ, that angles CBA, BAE, and AED have also been cut
καί ἐστι τῆς μὲν ὑπὸ ΒΓΔ ἡμίσεια ἡ ὑπὸ ΖΓΔ, τῆς δὲ ὑπὸ in half by the straight-lines FB, FA, and FE, respecΓΔΕ ἡμίσεια ἡ ὑπὸ ΓΔΖ, καὶ ἡ ὑπὸ ΖΓΔ ἄρα τῇ ὑπὸ ΖΔΓ tively. And since angle BCD is equal to CDE, and FCD
ἐστιν ἴση· ὥστε καὶ πλευρὰ ἡ ΖΓ πλευρᾷ τῇ ΖΔ ἐστιν ἴση. is half of BCD, and CDF half of CDE, FCD is thus
ὁμοίως δὴ δειχθήσεται, ὅτι καὶ ἑκάστη τῶν ΖΒ, ΖΑ, ΖΕ also equal to FDC. So that side FC is also equal to side
ἑκατέρᾳ τῶν ΖΓ, ΖΔ ἐστιν ἴση· αἱ πέντε ἄρα εὐθεῖαι αἱ FD [Prop. 1.6]. So, similarly, it can be shown that FB,
ΖΑ, ΖΒ, ΖΓ, ΖΔ, ΖΕ ἴσαι ἀλλήλαις εἰσίν. ὀ ἄρα κέντρῳ FA, and FE are also each equal to each of FC and FD.
τῷ Ζ καὶ διαστήματι ἑνὶ τῶν ΖΑ, ΖΒ, ΖΓ, ΖΔ, ΖΕ κύκλος Thus, the five straight-lines FA, FB, FC, FD, and FE
γραφόμενος ἥξει καὶ διὰ τῶν λοιπῶν σημείων καὶ ἔσται πε- are equal to one another. Thus, the circle drawn with
ριγεγραμμένος. περιγεγράφθω καὶ ἔστω ὁ ΑΒΓΔΕ. center F, and radius one of FA, FB, FC, FD, or FE,
Περὶ ἄρα τὸ δοθὲν πεντάγωνον, ὅ ἐστιν ἰσόπλευρόν τε will also go through the remaining points, and will have
καὶ ἰσογώνιον, κύκλος περιγέγραπται· ὅπερ ἔδει ποιῆσαι. been circumscribed. Let it have been (so) circumscribed,
and let it be ABCDE.
Thus, a circle has been circumscribed about the given
pentagon, which is equilateral and equiangular. (Which
is) the very thing it was required to do.
ieþ. Proposition 15
Εἰς τὸν δοθέντα κύκλον ἑξάγωνον ἰσόπλευρόν τε καὶ To inscribe an equilateral and equiangular hexagon in
ἰσογώνιον ἐγγράψαι. a given circle.
῎Εστω ὁ δοθεὶς κύκλος ὁ ΑΒΓΔΕΖ· δεῖ δὴ εἰς τὸν Let ABCDEF be the given circle. So it is required to
ΑΒΓΔΕΖ κύκλον ἑξάγωνον ἰσόπλευρόν τε καὶ ἰσογώνιον inscribe an equilateral and equiangular hexagon in circle
ἐγγράψαι. ABCDEF.
῎Ηχθω τοῦ ΑΒΓΔΕΖ κύκλου διάμετρος ἡ ΑΔ, καὶ Let the diameter AD of circle ABCDEF have been
εἰλήφθω τὸ κέντρον τοῦ κύκλου τὸ Η, καὶ κέντρῳ μὲν drawn,† and let the center G of the circle have been
τῷ Δ διαστήματι δὲ τῷ ΔΗ κύκλος γεγράφθω ὁ ΕΗΓΘ, found [Prop. 3.1]. And let the circle EGCH have been
καὶ ἐπιζευχθεῖσαι αἱ ΕΗ, ΓΗ διήχθωσαν ἐπὶ τὰ Β, Ζ σημεῖα, drawn, with center D, and radius DG. And EG and CG
καὶ ἐπεζεύχθωσαν αἱ ΑΒ, ΒΓ, ΓΔ, ΔΕ, ΕΖ, ΖΑ· λέγω, ὅτι being joined, let them have been drawn across (the cir124
STOIQEIWN dþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 4
τὸ ΑΒΓΔΕΖ ἑξάγωνον ἰσόπλευρόν τέ ἐστι καὶ ἰσογώνιον. cle) to points B and F (respectively). And let AB, BC,
CD, DE, EF, and FA have been joined. I say that the
hexagon ABCDEF is equilateral and equiangular.
Η
Β
Θ
Ε
Α
∆
Ζ
Γ C
H
D
B
A
G
F
E
᾿Επεὶ γὰρ τὸ Η σημεῖον κέντρον ἐστὶ τοῦ ΑΒΓΔΕΖ For since point G is the center of circle ABCDEF,
κύκλου, ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ΗΕ τῇ ΗΔ. πάλιν, ἐπεὶ τὸ Δ σημεῖον GE is equal to GD. Again, since point D is the cenκέντρον ἐστὶ τοῦ ΗΓΘ κύκλου, ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ΔΕ τῇ ΔΗ. ter of circle GCH, DE is equal to DG. But, GE was
ἀλλ᾿ ἡ ΗΕ τῇ ΗΔ ἐδείχθη ἴση· καὶ ἡ ΗΕ ἄρα τῇ ΕΔ ἴση shown (to be) equal to GD. Thus, GE is also equal to
ἐστίν· ἰσόπλευρον ἄρα ἐστὶ τὸ ΕΗΔ τρίγωνον· καὶ αἱ τρεῖς ED. Thus, triangle EGD is equilateral. Thus, its three
ἄρα αὐτοῦ γωνίαι αἱ ὑπὸ ΕΗΔ, ΗΔΕ, ΔΕΗ ἴσαι ἀλλήλαις angles EGD, GDE, and DEG are also equal to one anεἰσίν, ἐπειδήπερ τῶν ἰσοσκελῶν τριγώνων αἱ πρὸς τῇ βάσει other, inasmuch as the angles at the base of isosceles triγωνίαι ἴσαι ἀλλήλαις εἰσίν· καί εἰσιν αἱ τρεῖς τοῦ τριγώνου angles are equal to one another [Prop. 1.5]. And the
γωνίαι δυσὶν ὀρθαῖς ἴσαι· ἡ ἄρα ὑπὸ ΕΗΔ γωνία τρίτον ἐστὶ three angles of the triangle are equal to two right-angles
δύο ὀρθῶν. ὁμοίως δὴ δειχθήσεται καὶ ἡ ὑπὸ ΔΗΓ τρίτον [Prop. 1.32]. Thus, angle EGD is one third of two rightδύο ὀρθῶν. καὶ ἐπεὶ ἡ ΓΗ εὐθεῖα ἐπὶ τὴν ΕΒ σταθεῖσα τὰς angles. So, similarly, DGC can also be shown (to be)
ἐφεξῆς γωνίας τὰς ὑπὸ ΕΗΓ, ΓΗΒ δυσὶν ὀρθαῖς ἴσας ποιεῖ, one third of two right-angles. And since the straight-line
καὶ λοιπὴ ἄρα ἡ ὑπὸ ΓΗΒ τρίτον ἐστὶ δύο ὀρθῶν· αἱ ἄρα CG, standing on EB, makes adjacent angles EGC and
ὑπὸ ΕΗΔ, ΔΗΓ, ΓΗΒ γωνίαι ἴσαι ἀλλήλαις εἰσίν· ὥστε καὶ CGB equal to two right-angles [Prop. 1.13], the remainαἱ κατὰ κορυφὴν αὐταῖς αἱ ὑπὸ ΒΗΑ, ΑΗΖ, ΖΗΕ ἴσαι εἰσὶν ing angle CGB is thus also one third of two right-angles.
[ταῖς ὑπὸ ΕΗΔ, ΔΗΓ, ΓΗΒ]. αἱ ἓξ ἄρα γωνίαι αἱ ὑπὸ ΕΗΔ, Thus, angles EGD, DGC, and CGB are equal to one anΔΗΓ, ΓΗΒ, ΒΗΑ, ΑΗΖ, ΖΗΕ ἴσαι ἀλλήλαις εἰσίν. αἱ δὲ other. And hence the (angles) opposite to them BGA,
ἴσαι γωνίαι ἐπὶ ἴσων περιφερειῶν βεβήκασιν· αἱ ἓξ ἄρα πε- AGF, and FGE are also equal [to EGD, DGC, and
ριφέρειαι αἱ ΑΒ, ΒΓ, ΓΔ, ΔΕ, ΕΖ, ΖΑ ἴσαι ἀλλήλαις εἰσίν. CGB (respectively)] [Prop. 1.15]. Thus, the six angles
ὑπὸ δὲ τὰς ἴσας περιφερείας αἱ ἴσαι εὐθεῖαι ὑποτείνουσιν· EGD, DGC, CGB, BGA, AGF, and FGE are equal
αἱ ἓξ ἄρα εὐθεῖαι ἴσαι ἀλλήλαις εἰσίν· ἰσόπλευρον ἄρα ἐστὶ to one another. And equal angles stand on equal cirτο ΑΒΓΔΕΖ ἑξάγωνον. λέγω δή, ὅτι καὶ ἰσογώνιον. ἐπεὶ cumferences [Prop. 3.26]. Thus, the six circumferences
γὰρ ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ΖΑ περιφέρεια τῇ ΕΔ περιφερείᾳ, κοινὴ AB, BC, CD, DE, EF, and FA are equal to one anπροσκείσθω ἡ ΑΒΓΔ περιφέρεια· ὅλη ἄρα ἡ ΖΑΒΓΔ ὅλῃ other. And equal circumferences are subtended by equal
τῇ ΕΔΓΒΑ ἐστιν ἴση· καὶ βέβηκεν ἐπὶ μὲν τῆς ΖΑΒΓΔ straight-lines [Prop. 3.29]. Thus, the six straight-lines
περιφερείας ἡ ὑπὸ ΖΕΔ γωνία, ἐπὶ δὲ τῆς ΕΔΓΒΑ περι- (AB, BC, CD, DE, EF, and FA) are equal to one
φερείας ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΖΕ γωνία· ἴση ἄρα ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΖΕ γωνία τῇ another. Thus, hexagon ABCDEF is equilateral. So,
ὑπὸ ΔΕΖ. ὁμοίως δὴ δειχθήσεται, ὅτι καὶ αἱ λοιπαὶ γωνίαι I say that (it is) also equiangular. For since circumferτοῦ ΑΒΓΔΕΖ ἑξαγώνου κατὰ μίαν ἴσαι εἰσὶν ἑκατέρᾳ τῶν ence FA is equal to circumference ED, let circumference
ὑπὸ ΑΖΕ, ΖΕΔ γωνιῶν· ἰσογώνιον ἄρα ἐστὶ τὸ ΑΒΓΔΕΖ ABCD have been added to both. Thus, the whole of
ἑξάγωνον. ἐδείχθη δὲ καὶ ἰσόπλευρον· καὶ ἐγγέγραπται εἰς FABCD is equal to the whole of EDCBA. And angle
τὸν ΑΒΓΔΕΖ κύκλον. FED stands on circumference FABCD, and angle AFE
Εἰς ἄρα τὸν δοθέντα κύκλον ἑξάγωνον ἰσόπλευρόν τε on circumference EDCBA. Thus, angle AFE is equal
125
STOIQEIWN dþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 4
καὶ ἰσογώνιον ἐγγέγραπται· ὅπερ ἔδει ποιῆσαι. to DEF [Prop. 3.27]. Similarly, it can also be shown
that the remaining angles of hexagon ABCDEF are individually equal to each of the angles AFE and FED.
Thus, hexagon ABCDEF is equiangular. And it was also
shown (to be) equilateral. And it has been inscribed in
circle ABCDE.
Thus, an equilateral and equiangular hexagon has
been inscribed in the given circle. (Which is) the very
thing it was required to do.
Pìrisma. Corollary
᾿Εκ δὴ τούτου φανερόν, ὅτι ἡ τοῦ ἑξαγώνου πλευρὰ ἴση So, from this, (it is) manifest that a side of the
ἐστὶ τῇ ἐκ τοῦ κέντρου τοῦ κύκλου. hexagon is equal to the radius of the circle.
῾Ομοίως δὲ τοῖς ἐπὶ τοῦ πενταγώνου ἐὰν διὰ τῶν κατὰ And similarly to a pentagon, if we draw tangents
τὸν κύκλον διαιρέσεων ἐφαπτομένας τοῦ κύκλου ἀγάγωμεν, to the circle through the (sixfold) divisions of the (cirπεριγραφήσεται περὶ τὸν κύκλον ἑξάγωνον ἰσόπλευρόν cumference of the) circle, an equilateral and equianguτε καὶ ἰσογώνιον ἀκολούθως τοῖς ἐπὶ τοῦ πενταγώνου lar hexagon can be circumscribed about the circle, analoεἰρημένοις. καὶ ἔτι διὰ τῶν ὁμοίων τοῖς ἐπὶ τοῦ πενταγώνου gously to the aforementioned pentagon. And, further, by
εἰρημένοις εἰς τὸ δοθὲν ἑξάγωνον κύκλον ἐγγράψομέν τε (means) similar to the aforementioned pentagon, we can
καὶ περιγράψομεν· ὅπερ ἔδει ποιῆσαι. inscribe and circumscribe a circle in (and about) a given
hexagon. (Which is) the very thing it was required to do.
† See the footnote to Prop. 4.6.
iþ. Proposition 16
Εἰς τὸν δοθέντα κύκλον πεντεκαιδεκάγωνον ἰσόπλευρόν To inscribe an equilateral and equiangular fifteenτε καὶ ἰσογώνιον ἐγγράψαι. sided figure in a given circle.
Α
Β
Γ ∆
Ε
A
B
E
C D
῎Εστω ὁ δοθεὶς κύκλος ὁ ΑΒΓΔ· δεῖ δὴ εἰς τὸν ΑΒΓΔ Let ABCD be the given circle. So it is required to inκύκλον πεντεκαιδεκάγωνον ἰσόπλευρόν τε καὶ ἰσογώνιον scribe an equilateral and equiangular fifteen-sided figure
ἐγγράψαι. in circle ABCD.
᾿Εγγεγράφθω εἰς τὸν ΑΒΓΔ κύκλον τριγώνου μὲν ἰσο- Let the side AC of an equilateral triangle inscribed
πλεύρου τοῦ εἰς αὐτὸν ἐγγραφομένου πλευρὰ ἡ ΑΓ, πεν- in (the circle) [Prop. 4.2], and (the side) AB of an (inταγώνου δὲ ἰσοπλεύρου ἡ ΑΒ· οἵων ἄρα ἐστὶν ὁ ΑΒΓΔ scribed) equilateral pentagon [Prop. 4.11], have been inκύκλος ἴσων τμήματων δεκαπέντε, τοιούτων ἡ μὲν ΑΒΓ scribed in circle ABCD. Thus, just as the circle ABCD
περιφέρεια τρίτον οὖσα τοῦ κύκλου ἔσται πέντε, ἡ δὲ ΑΒ is (made up) of fifteen equal pieces, the circumference
περιφέρεια πέμτον οὖσα τοῦ κύκλου ἔσται τριῶν· λοιπὴ ἄρα ABC, being a third of the circle, will be (made up) of five
126
STOIQEIWN dþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 4
ἡ ΒΓ τῶν ἴσων δύο. τετμήσθω ἡ ΒΓ δίχα κατὰ τὸ Ε· such (pieces), and the circumference AB, being a fifth of
ἑκατέρα ἄρα τῶν ΒΕ, ΕΓ περιφερειῶν πεντεκαιδέκατόν ἐστι the circle, will be (made up) of three. Thus, the remainτοῦ ΑΒΓΔ κύκλου. der BC (will be made up) of two equal (pieces). Let (cir-
᾿Εὰν ἄρα ἐπιζεύξαντες τὰς ΒΕ, ΕΓ ἴσας αὐταῖς κατὰ τὸ cumference) BC have been cut in half at E [Prop. 3.30].
συνεχὲς εὐθείας ἐναρμόσωμεν εἰς τὸν ΑΒΓΔ[Ε] κύκλον, Thus, each of the circumferences BE and EC is one fifἔσται εἰς αὐτὸν ἐγγεγραμμένον πεντεκαιδεκάγωνον ἰσόπλευ- teenth of the circle ABCDE.
ρόν τε καὶ ἰσογώνιον· ὅπερ ἔδει ποιῆσαι. Thus, if, joining BE and EC, we continuously in-
῾Ομοίως δὲ τοῖς ἐπὶ τοῦ πενταγώνου ἐὰν διὰ τῶν sert straight-lines equal to them into circle ABCD[E]
κατὰ τὸν κύκλον διαιρέσεων ἐφαπτομένας τοῦ κύκλου [Prop. 4.1], then an equilateral and equiangular fifteenἀγάγωμεν, περιγραφήσεται περὶ τὸν κύκλον πεντεκαι- sided figure will have been inserted into (the circle).
δεκάγωνον ἰσόπλευρόν τε καὶ ἰσογώνιον. ἔτι δὲ διὰ (Which is) the very thing it was required to do.
τῶν ὁμοίων τοῖς ἐπὶ τοῦ πενταγώνου δείξεων καὶ εἰς τὸ And similarly to the pentagon, if we draw tangents to
δοθὲν πεντεκαιδεκάγωνον κύκλον ἐγγράψομέν τε καὶ πε- the circle through the (fifteenfold) divisions of the (cirριγράψομεν· ὅπερ ἔδει ποιῆσαι. cumference of the) circle, we can circumscribe an equilateral and equiangular fifteen-sided figure about the circle.
And, further, through similar proofs to the pentagon, we
can also inscribe and circumscribe a circle in (and about)
a given fifteen-sided figure. (Which is) the very thing it
was required to do.
127
128
ELEMENTS BOOK 5
Proportion†
†The theory of proportion set out in this book is generally attributed to Eudoxus of Cnidus. The novel feature of this theory is its ability to deal
with irrational magnitudes, which had hitherto been a major stumbling block for Greek mathematicians. Throughout the footnotes in this book,
α, β, γ, etc., denote general (possibly irrational) magnitudes, whereas m, n, l, etc., denote positive integers.
129
STOIQEIWN eþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 5
VOroi. Definitions
αʹ. Μέρος ἐστὶ μέγεθος μεγέθους τὸ ἔλασσον τοῦ 1. A magnitude is a part of a(nother) magnitude, the
μείζονος, ὅταν καταμετρῇ τὸ μεῖζον. lesser of the greater, when it measures the greater.†
βʹ. Πολλαπλάσιον δὲ τὸ μεῖζον τοῦ ἐλάττονος, ὅταν κα- 2. And the greater (magnitude is) a multiple of the
ταμετρῆται ὑπὸ τοῦ ἐλάττονος. lesser when it is measured by the lesser.
γʹ. Λόγος ἐστὶ δύο μεγεθῶν ὁμογενῶν ἡ κατὰ πη- 3. A ratio is a certain type of condition with respect to
λικότητά ποια σχέσις. size of two magnitudes of the same kind.‡
δʹ. Λόγον ἔχειν πρὸς ἄλληλα μεγέθη λέγεται, ἃ δύναται 4. (Those) magnitudes are said to have a ratio with reπολλαπλασιαζόμενα ἀλλήλων ὑπερέχειν. spect to one another which, being multiplied, are capable
εʹ. ᾿Εν τῷ αὐτῷ λόγῳ μεγέθη λέγεται εἶναι πρῶτον of exceeding one another.§
πρὸς δεύτερον καὶ τρίτον πρὸς τέταρτον, ὅταν τὰ τοῦ 5. Magnitudes are said to be in the same ratio, the first
πρώτου καί τρίτου ἰσάκις πολλαπλάσια τῶν τοῦ δευτέρου to the second, and the third to the fourth, when equal
καὶ τετάρτου ἰσάκις πολλαπλασίων καθ᾿ ὁποιονοῦν πολλα- multiples of the first and the third either both exceed, are
πλασιασμὸν ἑκάτερον ἑκατέρου ἢ ἅμα ὑπερέχῃ ἢ ἅμα ἴσα ᾖ both equal to, or are both less than, equal multiples of the
ἢ ἅμα ἐλλείπῇ ληφθέντα κατάλληλα. second and the fourth, respectively, being taken in correϛʹ. Τὰ δὲ τὸν αὐτὸν ἔχοντα λόγον μεγέθη ἀνάλογον sponding order, according to any kind of multiplication
καλείσθω. whatever.¶
ζʹ. ῞Οταν δὲ τῶν ἰσάκις πολλαπλασίων τὸ μὲν τοῦ 6. And let magnitudes having the same ratio be called
πρώτου πολλαπλάσιον ὑπερέχῃ τοῦ τοῦ δευτέρου πολ- proportional.∗
λαπλασίου, τὸ δὲ τοῦ τρίτου πολλαπλάσιον μὴ ὑπερέχῃ 7. And when for equal multiples (as in Def. 5), the
τοῦ τοῦ τετάρτου πολλαπλασίου, τότε τὸ πρῶτον πρὸς τὸ multiple of the first (magnitude) exceeds the multiple of
δεύτερον μείζονα λόγον ἔχειν λέγεται, ἤπερ τὸ τρίτον πρὸς the second, and the multiple of the third (magnitude)
τὸ τέταρτον. does not exceed the multiple of the fourth, then the first
ηʹ. ᾿Αναλογία δὲ ἐν τρισὶν ὅροις ἐλαχίστη ἐστίν. (magnitude) is said to have a greater ratio to the second
θʹ. ῞Οταν δὲ τρία μεγέθη ἀνάλογον ᾖ, τὸ πρῶτον πρὸς than the third (magnitude has) to the fourth.
τὸ τρίτον διπλασίονα λόγον ἔχειν λέγεται ἤπερ πρὸς τὸ 8. And a proportion in three terms is the smallest
δεύτερον. (possible).$
ιʹ. ῞Οταν δὲ τέσσαρα μεγέθη ἀνάλογον ᾖ, τὸ πρῶτον 9. And when three magnitudes are proportional, the
πρὸς τὸ τέταρτον τριπλασίονα λόγον ἔχειν λέγεται ἤπερ first is said to have to the third the squaredk
ratio of that
πρὸς τὸ δεύτερον, καὶ ἀεὶ ἑξῆς ὁμοίως, ὡς ἂν ἡ ἀναλογία (it has) to the second.††
ὑπάρχῃ. 10. And when four magnitudes are (continuously)
ιαʹ. ῾Ομόλογα μεγέθη λέγεται τὰ μὲν ἡγούμενα τοῖς proportional, the first is said to have to the fourth the
ἡγουμένοις τὰ δὲ ἑπόμενα τοῖς ἑπομένοις. cubed‡‡ ratio of that (it has) to the second.§§ And so on,
ιβʹ. ᾿Εναλλὰξ λόγος ἐστὶ λῆψις τοῦ ἡγουμένου πρὸς τὸ similarly, in successive order, whatever the (continuous)
ἡγούμενον καὶ τοῦ ἑπομένου πρὸς τὸ ἑπόμενον. proportion might be.
ιγʹ. ᾿Ανάπαλιν λόγος ἐστὶ λῆψις τοῦ ἑπομένου ὡς 11. These magnitudes are said to be corresponding
ἡγουμένου πρὸς τὸ ἡγούμενον ὡς ἑπόμενον. (magnitudes): the leading to the leading (of two ratios),
ιδʹ. Σύνθεσις λόγου ἐστὶ λῆψις τοῦ ἡγουμένου μετὰ τοῦ and the following to the following.
ἑπομένου ὡς ἑνὸς πρὸς αὐτὸ τὸ ἑπόμενον. 12. An alternate ratio is a taking of the (ratio of the)
ιεʹ. Διαίρεσις λόγου ἐστὶ λῆψις τῆς ὑπεροχῆς, ᾗ ὑπερέχει leading (magnitude) to the leading (of two equal ratios),
τὸ ἡγούμενον τοῦ ἑπομένου, πρὸς αὐτὸ τὸ ἑπόμενον. and (setting it equal to) the (ratio of the) following (magιϛʹ. ᾿Αναστροφὴ λόγου ἐστὶ λῆψις τοῦ ἡγουμένου πρὸς nitude) to the following.¶¶
τὴν ὑπεροχήν, ᾗ ὑπερέχει τὸ ἡγούμενον τοῦ ἑπομένου. 13. An inverse ratio is a taking of the (ratio of the) folιζʹ. Δι᾿ ἴσου λόγος ἐστὶ πλειόνων ὄντων μεγεθῶν καὶ lowing (magnitude) as the leading and the leading (magἄλλων αὐτοῖς ἴσων τὸ πλῆθος σύνδυο λαμβανομένων καὶ nitude) as the following.∗∗
ἐν τῷ αὐτῷ λόγῳ, ὅταν ᾖ ὡς ἐν τοῖς πρώτοις μεγέθεσι τὸ 14. A composition of a ratio is a taking of the (ratio of
πρῶτον πρὸς τὸ ἔσχατον, οὕτως ἐν τοῖς δευτέροις μεγέθεσι the) leading plus the following (magnitudes), as one, to
τὸ πρῶτον πρὸς τὸ ἔσχατον· ἢ ἄλλως· λῆψις τῶν ἄκρων the following (magnitude) by itself.$$
130
STOIQEIWN eþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 5
καθ᾿ ὑπεξαίρεσιν τῶν μέσων. 15. A separation of a ratio is a taking of the (ratio
ιηʹ. Τεταραγμένη δὲ ἀναλογία ἐστίν, ὅταν τριῶν ὄντων of the) excess by which the leading (magnitude) exceeds
μεγεθῶν καὶ ἄλλων αὐτοῖς ἴσων τὸ πλῆθος γίνηται ὡς μὲν the following to the following (magnitude) by itself.kk
ἐν τοῖς πρώτοις μεγέθεσιν ἡγούμενον πρὸς ἐπόμενον, οὕτως 16. A conversion of a ratio is a taking of the (ratio
ἐν τοῖς δευτέροις μεγέθεσιν ἡγούμενον πρὸς ἑπόμενον, ὡς of the) leading (magnitude) to the excess by which the
δὲ ἐν τοῖς πρώτοις μεγέθεσιν ἑπόμενον πρὸς ἄλλο τι, οὕτως leading (magnitude) exceeds the following.†††
ἐν τοῖς δευτέροις ἄλλο τι πρὸς ἡγούμενον. 17. There being several magnitudes, and other (magnitudes) of equal number to them, (which are) also in the
same ratio taken two by two, a ratio via equality (or ex
aequali) occurs when as the first is to the last in the first
(set of) magnitudes, so the first (is) to the last in the second (set of) magnitudes. Or alternately, (it is) a taking of
the (ratio of the) outer (magnitudes) by the removal of
the inner (magnitudes).‡‡‡
18. There being three magnitudes, and other (magnitudes) of equal number to them, a perturbed proportion
occurs when as the leading is to the following in the first
(set of) magnitudes, so the leading (is) to the following
in the second (set of) magnitudes, and as the following
(is) to some other (i.e., the remaining magnitude) in the
first (set of) magnitudes, so some other (is) to the leading
in the second (set of) magnitudes.§§§
†
In other words, α is said to be a part of β if β = m α.
‡
In modern notation, the ratio of two magnitudes, α and β, is denoted α : β.
§
In other words, α has a ratio with respect to β if m α > β and n β > α, for some m and n.
¶ In other words, α : β :: γ : δ if and only if m α > n β whenever m γ > n δ, and m α = n β whenever m γ = n δ, and m α < n β whenever
m γ < n δ, for all m and n. This definition is the kernel of Eudoxus’ theory of proportion, and is valid even if α, β, etc., are irrational.
∗ Thus if α and β have the same ratio as γ and δ then they are proportional. In modern notation, α : β :: γ : δ.
$
In modern notation, a proportion in three terms—α, β, and γ—is written: α : β :: β : γ.
k Literally, “double”.
†† In other words, if α : β :: β : γ then α : γ :: α
2
: β
2
.
‡‡ Literally, “triple”.
§§ In other words, if α : β :: β : γ :: γ : δ then α : δ :: α
3
: β
3
.
¶¶ In other words, if α : β :: γ : δ then the alternate ratio corresponds to α : γ :: β : δ.
∗∗ In other words, if α : β then the inverse ratio corresponds to β : α.
$$ In other words, if α : β then the composed ratio corresponds to α + β : β.
kk In other words, if α : β then the separated ratio corresponds to α − β : β.
††† In other words, if α : β then the converted ratio corresponds to α : α − β.
‡‡‡ In other words, if α, β, γ are the first set of magnitudes, and δ, ǫ, ζ the second set, and α : β : γ :: δ : ǫ : ζ, then the ratio via equality (or ex
aequali) corresponds to α : γ :: δ : ζ.
§§§ In other words, if α, β, γ are the first set of magnitudes, and δ, ǫ, ζ the second set, and α : β :: δ : ǫ as well as β : γ :: ζ : δ, then the proportion
is said to be perturbed.
aþ. Proposition 1†
᾿Εὰν ᾖ ὁποσαοῦν μεγέθη ὁποσωνοῦν μεγεθῶν ἴσων τὸ If there are any number of magnitudes whatsoever
πλῆθος ἕκαστον ἑκάστου ἰσάκις πολλαπλάσιον, ὁσαπλάσιόν (which are) equal multiples, respectively, of some (other)
ἐστιν ἓν τῶν μεγεθῶν ἑνός, τοσαυταπλάσια ἔσται καὶ τὰ magnitudes, of equal number (to them), then as many
131
STOIQEIWN eþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 5
πάντα τῶν πάντων. times as one of the (first) magnitudes is (divisible) by
one (of the second), so many times will all (of the first
magnitudes) also (be divisible) by all (of the second).
Ζ
Α Η Β Γ Θ ∆
Ε F
A G B C H D
E
῎Εστω ὁποσαοῦν μεγέθη τὰ ΑΒ, ΓΔ ὁποσωνοῦν με- Let there be any number of magnitudes whatsoever,
γεθῶν τῶν Ε, Ζ ἴσων τὸ πλῆθος ἕκαστον ἑκάστου ἰσάκις AB, CD, (which are) equal multiples, respectively, of
πολλαπλάσιον· λέγω, ὅτι ὁσαπλάσιόν ἐστι τὸ ΑΒ τοῦ Ε, some (other) magnitudes, E, F, of equal number (to
τοσαυταπλάσια ἔσται καὶ τὰ ΑΒ, ΓΔ τῶν Ε, Ζ. them). I say that as many times as AB is (divisible) by E,
᾿Επεὶ γὰρ ἰσάκις ἐστὶ πολλαπλάσιον τὸ ΑΒ τοῦ Ε καὶ so many times will AB, CD also be (divisible) by E, F.
τὸ ΓΔ τοῦ Ζ, ὅσα ἄρα ἐστὶν ἐν τῷ ΑΒ μεγέθη ἴσα τῷ Ε, For since AB, CD are equal multiples of E, F, thus
τοσαῦτα καὶ ἐν τῷ ΓΔ ἴσα τῷ Ζ. διῃρήσθω τὸ μὲν ΑΒ εἰς τὰ as many magnitudes as (there) are in AB equal to E, so
τῷ Ε μεγέθη ἴσα τὰ ΑΗ, ΗΒ, τὸ δὲ ΓΔ εἰς τὰ τῷ Ζ ἴσα τὰ many (are there) also in CD equal to F. Let AB have
ΓΘ, ΘΔ· ἔσται δὴ ἴσον τὸ πλῆθος τῶν ΑΗ, ΗΒ τῷ πλήθει been divided into magnitudes AG, GB, equal to E, and
τῶν ΓΘ, ΘΔ. καὶ ἐπεὶ ἴσον ἐστὶ τὸ μὲν ΑΗ τῷ Ε, τὸ δὲ ΓΘ CD into (magnitudes) CH, HD, equal to F. So, the
τῷ Ζ, ἴσον ἄρα τὸ ΑΗ τῷ Ε, καὶ τὰ ΑΗ, ΓΘ τοῖς Ε, Ζ. διὰ number of (divisions) AG, GB will be equal to the numτὰ αὐτὰ δὴ ἴσον ἐστὶ τὸ ΗΒ τῷ Ε, καὶ τὰ ΗΒ, ΘΔ τοῖς Ε, ber of (divisions) CH, HD. And since AG is equal to E,
Ζ· ὅσα ἄρα ἐστὶν ἐν τῷ ΑΒ ἴσα τῷ Ε, τοσαῦτα καὶ ἐν τοῖς and CH to F, AG (is) thus equal to E, and AG, CH to E,
ΑΒ, ΓΔ ἴσα τοῖς Ε, Ζ· ὁσαπλάσιον ἄρα ἐστὶ τὸ ΑΒ τοῦ Ε, F. So, for the same (reasons), GB is equal to E, and GB,
τοσαυταπλάσια ἔσται καὶ τὰ ΑΒ, ΓΔ τῶν Ε, Ζ. HD to E, F. Thus, as many (magnitudes) as (there) are
᾿Εὰν ἄρα ᾖ ὁποσαοῦν μεγέθη ὁποσωνοῦν μεγεθῶν in AB equal to E, so many (are there) also in AB, CD
ἴσων τὸ πλῆθος ἕκαστον ἑκάστου ἰσάκις πολλαπλάσιον, equal to E, F. Thus, as many times as AB is (divisible)
ὁσαπλάσιόν ἐστιν ἓν τῶν μεγεθῶν ἑνός, τοσαυταπλάσια by E, so many times will AB, CD also be (divisible) by
ἔσται καὶ τὰ πάντα τῶν πάντων· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. E, F.
Thus, if there are any number of magnitudes whatsoever (which are) equal multiples, respectively, of some
(other) magnitudes, of equal number (to them), then as
many times as one of the (first) magnitudes is (divisible) by one (of the second), so many times will all (of the
first magnitudes) also (be divisible) by all (of the second).
(Which is) the very thing it was required to show.
†
In modern notation, this proposition reads m α + m β + · · · = m (α + β + · · · ).
bþ. Proposition 2†
᾿Εὰν πρῶτον δευτέρου ἰσάκις ᾖ πολλαπλάσιον καὶ τρίτον If a first (magnitude) and a third are equal multiples
τετάρτου, ᾖ δὲ καὶ πέμπτον δευτέρου ἰσάκις πολλαπλάσιον of a second and a fourth (respectively), and a fifth (magκαὶ ἕκτον τετάρτου, καὶ συντεθὲν πρῶτον καὶ πέμπτον nitude) and a sixth (are) also equal multiples of the secδευτέρου ἰσάκις ἔσται πολλαπλάσιον καὶ τρίτον καὶ ἕκτον ond and fourth (respectively), then the first (magnitude)
τετάρτου. and the fifth, being added together, and the third and the
Πρῶτον γὰρ τὸ ΑΒ δευτέρου τοῦ Γ ἰσάκις ἔστω πολ- sixth, (being added together), will also be equal multiples
λαπλάσιον καὶ τρίτον τὸ ΔΕ τετάρτου τοῦ Ζ, ἔστω δὲ καὶ of the second (magnitude) and the fourth (respectively).
πέμπτον τὸ ΒΗ δευτέρου τοῦ Γ ἰσάκις πολλαπλάσιον καὶ For let a first (magnitude) AB and a third DE be
ἕκτον τὸ ΕΘ τετάρτου τοῦ Ζ· λέγω, ὅτι καὶ συντεθὲν equal multiples of a second C and a fourth F (respecπρῶτον καὶ πέμπτον τὸ ΑΗ δευτέρου τοῦ Γ ἰσάκις ἔσται tively). And let a fifth (magnitude) BG and a sixth EH
πολλαπλάσιον καὶ τρίτον καὶ ἕκτον τὸ ΔΘ τετάρτου τοῦ Ζ. also be (other) equal multiples of the second C and the
fourth F (respectively). I say that the first (magnitude)
and the fifth, being added together, (to give) AG, and the
third (magnitude) and the sixth, (being added together,
132
STOIQEIWN eþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 5
to give) DH, will also be equal multiples of the second
(magnitude) C and the fourth F (respectively).
Ζ
Α Β Η
∆ Ε Θ
Γ
H
A B G
C
F
D E
᾿Επεὶ γὰρ ἰσάκις ἐστὶ πολλαπλάσιον τὸ ΑΒ τοῦ Γ καὶ τὸ For since AB and DE are equal multiples of C and F
ΔΕ τοῦ Ζ, ὅσα ἄρα ἐστὶν ἐν τῷ ΑΒ ἴσα τῷ Γ, τοσαῦτα καὶ (respectively), thus as many (magnitudes) as (there) are
ἐν τῷ ΔΕ ἴσα τῷ Ζ. διὰ τὰ αὐτὰ δὴ καὶ ὅσα ἐστὶν ἐν τῷ ΒΗ in AB equal to C, so many (are there) also in DE equal to
ἴσα τῷ Γ, τοσαῦτα καὶ ἐν τῷ ΕΘ ἴσα τῷ Ζ· ὅσα ἄρα ἐστὶν ἐν F. And so, for the same (reasons), as many (magnitudes)
ὅλῳ τῷ ΑΗ ἴσα τῷ Γ, τοσαῦτα καὶ ἐν ὅλῳ τῷ ΔΘ ἴσα τῷ Ζ· as (there) are in BG equal to C, so many (are there)
ὁσαπλάσιον ἄρα ἐστὶ τὸ ΑΗ τοῦ Γ, τοσαυταπλάσιον ἔσται also in EH equal to F. Thus, as many (magnitudes) as
καὶ τὸ ΔΘ τοῦ Ζ. καὶ συντεθὲν ἄρα πρῶτον καὶ πέμπτον τὸ (there) are in the whole of AG equal to C, so many (are
ΑΗ δευτέρου τοῦ Γ ἰσάκις ἔσται πολλαπλάσιον καὶ τρίτον there) also in the whole of DH equal to F. Thus, as many
καὶ ἕκτον τὸ ΔΘ τετάρτου τοῦ Ζ. times as AG is (divisible) by C, so many times will DH
᾿Εὰν ἄρα πρῶτον δευτέρου ἰσάκις ᾖ πολλαπλάσιον καὶ also be divisible by F. Thus, the first (magnitude) and
τρίτον τετάρτου, ᾖ δὲ καὶ πέμπτον δευτέρου ἰσάκις πολ- the fifth, being added together, (to give) AG, and the
λαπλάσιον καὶ ἕκτον τετάρτου, καὶ συντεθὲν πρῶτον καὶ third (magnitude) and the sixth, (being added together,
πέμπτον δευτέρου ἰσάκις ἔσται πολλαπλάσιον καὶ τρίτον καὶ to give) DH, will also be equal multiples of the second
ἕκτον τετάρτου· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. (magnitude) C and the fourth F (respectively).
Thus, if a first (magnitude) and a third are equal multiples of a second and a fourth (respectively), and a fifth
(magnitude) and a sixth (are) also equal multiples of the
second and fourth (respectively), then the first (magnitude) and the fifth, being added together, and the third
and sixth, (being added together), will also be equal multiples of the second (magnitude) and the fourth (respectively). (Which is) the very thing it was required to show.
†
In modern notation, this propostion reads m α + n α = (m + n) α.
gþ. Proposition 3†
᾿Εὰν πρῶτον δευτέρου ἰσάκις ᾖ πολλαπλάσιον καὶ τρίτον If a first (magnitude) and a third are equal multiples
τετάρτου, ληφθῇ δὲ ἰσάκις πολλαπλάσια τοῦ τε πρώτου of a second and a fourth (respectively), and equal multiκαὶ τρίτου, καὶ δι᾿ ἴσου τῶν ληφθέντων ἑκάτερον ἑκατέρου ples are taken of the first and the third, then, via equality,
ἰσάκις ἔσται πολλαπλάσιον τὸ μὲν τοῦ δευτέρου τὸ δὲ τοῦ the (magnitudes) taken will also be equal multiples of the
τετάρτου. second (magnitude) and the fourth, respectively.
Πρῶτον γὰρ τὸ Α δευτέρου τοῦ Β ἰσάκις ἔστω πολ- For let a first (magnitude) A and a third C be equal
λαπλάσιον καὶ τρίτον τὸ Γ τετάρτου τοῦ Δ, καὶ εἰλήφθω multiples of a second B and a fourth D (respectively),
τῶν Α, Γ ἰσάκις πολλαπλάσια τὰ ΕΖ, ΗΘ· λέγω, ὅτι ἰσάκις and let the equal multiples EF and GH have been taken
ἐστὶ πολλαπλάσιον τὸ ΕΖ τοῦ Β καὶ τὸ ΗΘ τοῦ Δ. of A and C (respectively). I say that EF and GH are
᾿Επεὶ γὰρ ἰσάκις ἐστὶ πολλαπλάσιον τὸ ΕΖ τοῦ Α καὶ equal multiples of B and D (respectively).
τὸ ΗΘ τοῦ Γ, ὅσα ἄρα ἐστὶν ἐν τῷ ΕΖ ἴσα τῷ Α, τοσαῦτα For since EF and GH are equal multiples of A and
καὶ ἐν τῷ ΗΘ ἴσα τῷ Γ. διῃρήσθω τὸ μὲν ΕΖ εἰς τὰ τῷ Α C (respectively), thus as many (magnitudes) as (there)
μεγέθη ἴσα τὰ ΕΚ, ΚΖ, τὸ δὲ ΗΘ εἰς τὰ τῷ Γ ἴσα τὰ ΗΛ, are in EF equal to A, so many (are there) also in GH
133
STOIQEIWN eþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 5
ΛΘ· ἔσται δὴ ἴσον τὸ πλῆθος τῶν ΕΚ, ΚΖ τῷ πλήθει τῶν equal to C. Let EF have been divided into magnitudes
ΗΛ, ΛΘ. καὶ ἐπεὶ ἰσάκις ἐστὶ πολλαπλάσιον τὸ Α τοῦ Β καὶ EK, KF equal to A, and GH into (magnitudes) GL, LH
τὸ Γ τοῦ Δ, ἴσον δὲ τὸ μὲν ΕΚ τῷ Α, τὸ δὲ ΗΛ τῷ Γ, equal to C. So, the number of (magnitudes) EK, KF
ἰσάκις ἄρα ἐστὶ πολλαπλάσιον τὸ ΕΚ τοῦ Β καὶ τὸ ΗΛ τοῦ will be equal to the number of (magnitudes) GL, LH.
Δ. διὰ τὰ αὐτὰ δὴ ἰσάκις ἐστὶ πολλαπλάσιον τὸ ΚΖ τοῦ Β And since A and C are equal multiples of B and D (reκαὶ τὸ ΛΘ τοῦ Δ. ἐπεὶ οὖν πρῶτον τὸ ΕΚ δευτέρου τοῦ Β spectively), and EK (is) equal to A, and GL to C, EK
ἴσάκις ἐστὶ πολλαπλάσιον καὶ τρίτον τὸ ΗΛ τετάρτου τοῦ and GL are thus equal multiples of B and D (respecΔ, ἔστι δὲ καὶ πέμπτον τὸ ΚΖ δευτέρου τοῦ Β ἰσάκις πολ- tively). So, for the same (reasons), KF and LH are equal
λαπλάσιον καὶ ἕκτον τὸ ΛΘ τετάρτου τοῦ Δ, καὶ συντεθὲν multiples of B and D (respectively). Therefore, since the
ἄρα πρῶτον καὶ πέμπτον τὸ ΕΖ δευτέρου τοῦ Β ἰσάκις ἐστὶ first (magnitude) EK and the third GL are equal mulπολλαπλάσιον καὶ τρίτον καὶ ἕκτον τὸ ΗΘ τετάρτου τοῦ Δ. tiples of the second B and the fourth D (respectively),
and the fifth (magnitude) KF and the sixth LH are also
equal multiples of the second B and the fourth D (respectively), then the first (magnitude) and fifth, being
added together, (to give) EF, and the third (magnitude)
and sixth, (being added together, to give) GH, are thus
also equal multiples of the second (magnitude) B and the
fourth D (respectively) [Prop. 5.2].
Α
Γ
Ε Κ Ζ
∆
Η Λ Θ
Β
A
E K F
G H
C
D
B
L
᾿Εὰν ἄρα πρῶτον δευτέρου ἰσάκις ᾖ πολλαπλάσιον Thus, if a first (magnitude) and a third are equal mulκαὶ τρίτον τετάρτου, ληφθῇ δὲ τοῦ πρώτου καὶ τρίτου tiples of a second and a fourth (respectively), and equal
ἰσάκις πολλαπλάσια, καὶ δι᾿ ἴσου τῶν ληφθέντων ἑκάτερον multiples are taken of the first and the third, then, via
ἑκατέρου ἰσάκις ἔσται πολλαπλάσιον τὸ μὲν τοῦ δευτέρου equality, the (magnitudes) taken will also be equal mulτὸ δὲ τοῦ τετάρτου· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. tiples of the second (magnitude) and the fourth, respectively. (Which is) the very thing it was required to show.
†
In modern notation, this proposition reads m(n α) = (m n) α.
dþ. Proposition 4†
᾿Εὰν πρῶτον πρὸς δεύτερον τὸν αὐτὸν ἔχῃ λόγον καὶ If a first (magnitude) has the same ratio to a second
τρίτον πρὸς τέταρτον, καὶ τὰ ἰσάκις πολλαπλάσια τοῦ τε that a third (has) to a fourth then equal multiples of the
πρώτου καὶ τρίτου πρὸς τὰ ἰσάκις πολλαπλάσια τοῦ δευτέρου first (magnitude) and the third will also have the same
καὶ τετάρτου καθ᾿ ὁποιονοῦν πολλαπλασιασμὸν τὸν αὐτὸν ratio to equal multiples of the second and the fourth, beἕξει λόγον ληφθέντα κατάλληλα. ing taken in corresponding order, according to any kind
Πρῶτον γὰρ τὸ Α πρὸς δεύτερον τὸ Β τὸν αὐτὸν ἐχέτω of multiplication whatsoever.
λόγον καὶ τρίτον τὸ Γ πρὸς τέταρτον τὸ Δ, καὶ εἰλήφθω For let a first (magnitude) A have the same ratio to
τῶν μὲν Α, Γ ἰσάκις πολλαπλάσια τὰ Ε, Ζ, τῶν δὲ Β, Δ a second B that a third C (has) to a fourth D. And let
ἄλλα, ἃ ἔτυχεν, ἰσάκις πολλαπλάσια τὰ Η, Θ· λέγω, ὅτι equal multiples E and F have been taken of A and C
ἐστὶν ὡς τὸ Ε πρὸς τὸ Η, οὕτως τὸ Ζ πρὸς τὸ Θ. (respectively), and other random equal multiples G and
134
STOIQEIWN eþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 5
H of B and D (respectively). I say that as E (is) to G, so
F (is) to H.
Ν
Μ
Γ
∆
Α
Κ
Η
Ε
Β
Ζ
Θ
Λ
N
A
B
E
G
K
M
C
D
F
H
L
Εἰλήφθω γὰρ τῶν μὲν Ε, Ζ ἰσάκις πολλαπλάσια τὰ Κ, For let equal multiples K and L have been taken of E
Λ, τῶν δὲ Η, Θ ἄλλα, ἃ ἔτυχεν, ἰσάκις πολλαπλάσια τὰ Μ, and F (respectively), and other random equal multiples
Ν. M and N of G and H (respectively).
[Καὶ] ἐπεὶ ἰσάκις ἐστὶ πολλαπλάσιον τὸ μὲν Ε τοῦ Α, τὸ [And] since E and F are equal multiples of A and
δὲ Ζ τοῦ Γ, καὶ εἴληπται τῶν Ε, Ζ ἴσάκις πολλαπλάσια τὰ Κ, C (respectively), and the equal multiples K and L have
Λ, ἴσάκις ἄρα ἐστὶ πολλαπλάσιον τὸ Κ τοῦ Α καὶ τὸ Λ τοῦ been taken of E and F (respectively), K and L are thus
Γ. διὰ τὰ αὐτὰ δὴ ἰσάκις ἐστὶ πολλαπλάσιον τὸ Μ τοῦ Β καὶ equal multiples of A and C (respectively) [Prop. 5.3]. So,
τὸ Ν τοῦ Δ. καὶ ἐπεί ἐστιν ὡς τὸ Α πρὸς τὸ Β, οὕτως τὸ Γ for the same (reasons), M and N are equal multiples of
πρὸς τὸ Δ, καὶ εἴληπται τῶν μὲν Α, Γ ἰσάκις πολλαπλάσια B and D (respectively). And since as A is to B, so C (is)
τὰ Κ, Λ, τῶν δὲ Β, Δ ἄλλα, ἃ ἔτυχεν, ἰσάκις πολλαπλάσια to D, and the equal multiples K and L have been taken
τὰ Μ, Ν, εἰ ἄρα ὑπερέχει τὸ Κ τοῦ Μ, ὑπερέχει καὶ τὸ Λ of A and C (respectively), and the other random equal
τοῦ Ν, καὶ εἰ ἴσον, ἴσον, καὶ εἰ ἔλαττον, ἔλαττον. καί ἐστι multiples M and N of B and D (respectively), then if K
τὰ μὲν Κ, Λ τῶν Ε, Ζ ἰσάκις πολλαπλάσια, τὰ δὲ Μ, Ν τῶν exceeds M then L also exceeds N, and if (K is) equal (to
Η, Θ ἄλλα, ἃ ἔτυχεν, ἰσάκις πολλαπλάσια· ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς τὸ M then L is also) equal (to N), and if (K is) less (than M
Ε πρὸς τὸ Η, οὕτως τὸ Ζ πρὸς τὸ Θ. then L is also) less (than N) [Def. 5.5]. And K and L are
᾿Εὰν ἄρα πρῶτον πρὸς δεύτερον τὸν αὐτὸν ἔχῃ λόγον equal multiples of E and F (respectively), and M and N
καὶ τρίτον πρὸς τέταρτον, καὶ τὰ ἰσάκις πολλαπλάσια τοῦ τε other random equal multiples of G and H (respectively).
πρώτου καὶ τρίτου πρὸς τὰ ἰσάκις πολλαπλάσια τοῦ δευτέρου Thus, as E (is) to G, so F (is) to H [Def. 5.5].
καὶ τετάρτου τὸν αὐτὸν ἕξει λόγον καθ᾿ ὁποιονοῦν πολλα- Thus, if a first (magnitude) has the same ratio to a
πλασιασμὸν ληφθέντα κατάλληλα· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. second that a third (has) to a fourth then equal multiples of the first (magnitude) and the third will also have
the same ratio to equal multiples of the second and the
fourth, being taken in corresponding order, according to
any kind of multiplication whatsoever. (Which is) the
very thing it was required to show.
†
In modern notation, this proposition reads that if α : β :: γ : δ then m α : n β :: m γ : n δ, for all m and n.
135
STOIQEIWN eþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 5
eþ. Proposition 5†
᾿Εὰν μέγεθος μεγέθους ἰσάκις ᾖ πολλαπλάσιον, ὅπερ If a magnitude is the same multiple of a magnitude
ἀφαιρεθὲν ἀφαιρεθέντος, καὶ τὸ λοιπὸν τοῦ λοιποῦ ἰσάκις that a (part) taken away (is) of a (part) taken away (reἔσται πολλαπλάσιον, ὁσαπλάσιόν ἐστι τὸ ὅλον τοῦ ὅλου. spectively) then the remainder will also be the same multiple of the remainder as that which the whole (is) of the
whole (respectively).
Α Ε Β
Η Γ Ζ ∆ D
A
G C
E
F
B
Μέγεθος γὰρ τὸ ΑΒ μεγέθους τοῦ ΓΔ ἰσάκις ἔστω πολ- For let the magnitude AB be the same multiple of the
λαπλάσιον, ὅπερ ἀφαιρεθὲν τὸ ΑΕ ἀφαιρεθέντος τοῦ ΓΖ· magnitude CD that the (part) taken away AE (is) of the
λέγω, ὅτι καὶ λοιπὸν τὸ ΕΒ λοιποῦ τοῦ ΖΔ ἰσάκις ἔσται (part) taken away CF (respectively). I say that the reπολλαπλάσιον, ὁσαπλάσιόν ἐστιν ὅλον τὸ ΑΒ ὅλου τοῦ ΓΔ. mainder EB will also be the same multiple of the remain-
῾Οσαπλάσιον γάρ ἐστι τὸ ΑΕ τοῦ ΓΖ, τοσαυταπλάσιον der FD as that which the whole AB (is) of the whole CD
γεγονέτω καὶ τὸ ΕΒ τοῦ ΓΗ. (respectively).
Καὶ ἐπεὶ ἰσάκις ἐστὶ πολλαπλάσιον τὸ ΑΕ τοῦ ΓΖ καὶ τὸ For as many times as AE is (divisible) by CF, so many
ΕΒ τοῦ ΗΓ, ἰσάκις ἄρα ἐστὶ πολλαπλάσιον τὸ ΑΕ τοῦ ΓΖ times let EB also have been made (divisible) by CG.
καὶ τὸ ΑΒ τοῦ ΗΖ. κεῖται δὲ ἰσάκις πολλαπλάσιον τὸ ΑΕ And since AE and EB are equal multiples of CF and
τοῦ ΓΖ καὶ τὸ ΑΒ τοῦ ΓΔ. ἰσάκις ἄρα ἐστὶ πολλαπλάσιον τὸ GC (respectively), AE and AB are thus equal multiples
ΑΒ ἑκατέρου τῶν ΗΖ, ΓΔ· ἴσον ἄρα τὸ ΗΖ τῷ ΓΔ. κοινὸν of CF and GF (respectively) [Prop. 5.1]. And AE and
ἀφῃρήσθω τὸ ΓΖ· λοιπὸν ἄρα τὸ ΗΓ λοιπῷ τῷ ΖΔ ἴσον AB are assumed (to be) equal multiples of CF and CD
ἐστίν. καὶ ἐπεὶ ἰσάκις ἐστὶ πολλαπλάσιον τὸ ΑΕ τοῦ ΓΖ (respectively). Thus, AB is an equal multiple of each
καὶ τὸ ΕΒ τοῦ ΗΓ, ἴσον δὲ τὸ ΗΓ τῷ ΔΖ, ἰσάκις ἄρα ἐστὶ of GF and CD. Thus, GF (is) equal to CD. Let CF
πολλαπλάσιον τὸ ΑΕ τοῦ ΓΖ καὶ τὸ ΕΒ τοῦ ΖΔ. ἰσάκις δὲ have been subtracted from both. Thus, the remainder
ὑπόκειται πολλαπλάσιον τὸ ΑΕ τοῦ ΓΖ καὶ τὸ ΑΒ τοῦ ΓΔ· GC is equal to the remainder FD. And since AE and
ἰσάκις ἄρα ἐστὶ πολλαπλάσιον τὸ ΕΒ τοῦ ΖΔ καὶ τὸ ΑΒ EB are equal multiples of CF and GC (respectively),
τοῦ ΓΔ. καὶ λοιπὸν ἄρα τὸ ΕΒ λοιποῦ τοῦ ΖΔ ἰσάκις ἔσται and GC (is) equal to DF, AE and EB are thus equal
πολλαπλάσιον, ὁσαπλάσιόν ἐστιν ὅλον τὸ ΑΒ ὅλου τοῦ ΓΔ. multiples of CF and FD (respectively). And AE and
᾿Εὰν ἄρα μέγεθος μεγέθους ἰσάκις ᾖ πολλαπλάσιον, AB are assumed (to be) equal multiples of CF and CD
ὅπερ ἀφαιρεθὲν ἀφαιρεθέντος, καὶ τὸ λοιπὸν τοῦ λοιποῦ (respectively). Thus, EB and AB are equal multiples of
ἰσάκις ἔσται πολλαπλάσιον, ὁσαπλάσιόν ἐστι καὶ τὸ ὅλον FD and CD (respectively). Thus, the remainder EB will
τοῦ ὅλου· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. also be the same multiple of the remainder FD as that
which the whole AB (is) of the whole CD (respectively).
Thus, if a magnitude is the same multiple of a magnitude that a (part) taken away (is) of a (part) taken away
(respectively) then the remainder will also be the same
multiple of the remainder as that which the whole (is) of
the whole (respectively). (Which is) the very thing it was
required to show.
†
In modern notation, this proposition reads m α − m β = m (α − β).
þ. Proposition 6†
᾿Εὰν δύο μεγέθη δύο μεγεθῶν ἰσάκις ᾖ πολλαπλάσια, If two magnitudes are equal multiples of two (other)
καὶ ἀφαιρεθέντα τινὰ τῶν αὐτῶν ἰσάκις ᾖ πολλαπλάσια, καὶ magnitudes, and some (parts) taken away (from the forτὰ λοιπὰ τοῖς αὐτοῖς ἤτοι ἴσα ἐστὶν ἢ ἰσάκις αὐτῶν πολ- mer magnitudes) are equal multiples of the latter (magλαπλάσια. nitudes, respectively), then the remainders are also either
Δύο γὰρ μεγέθη τὰ ΑΒ, ΓΔ δύο μεγεθῶν τῶν Ε, Ζ equal to the latter (magnitudes), or (are) equal multiples
136
STOIQEIWN eþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 5
ἰσάκις ἔστω πολλαπλάσια, καὶ ἀφαιρεθέντα τὰ ΑΗ, ΓΘ τῶν of them (respectively).
αὐτῶν τῶν Ε, Ζ ἰσάκις ἔστω πολλαπλάσια· λέγω, ὅτι καὶ For let two magnitudes AB and CD be equal multiλοιπὰ τὰ ΗΒ, ΘΔ τοῖς Ε, Ζ ἤτοι ἴσα ἐστὶν ἢ ἰσάκις αὐτῶν ples of two magnitudes E and F (respectively). And let
πολλαπλάσια. the (parts) taken away (from the former) AG and CH be
equal multiples of E and F (respectively). I say that the
remainders GB and HD are also either equal to E and F
(respectively), or (are) equal multiples of them.
Ζ
Η Β
Γ Θ ∆
Α
Κ
Ε
F
G B
C H D
A
K
E
῎Εστω γὰρ πρότερον τὸ ΗΒ τῷ Ε ἴσον· λέγω, ὅτι καὶ For let GB be, first of all, equal to E. I say that HD is
τὸ ΘΔ τῷ Ζ ἴσον ἐστίν. also equal to F.
Κείσθω γὰρ τῷ Ζ ἴσον τὸ ΓΚ. ἐπεὶ ἰσάκις ἐστὶ πολ- For let CK be made equal to F. Since AG and CH
λαπλάσιον τὸ ΑΗ τοῦ Ε καὶ τὸ ΓΘ τοῦ Ζ, ἴσον δὲ τὸ μὲν ΗΒ are equal multiples of E and F (respectively), and GB
τῷ Ε, τὸ δὲ ΚΓ τῷ Ζ, ἰσάκις ἄρα ἐστὶ πολλαπλάσιον τὸ ΑΒ (is) equal to E, and KC to F, AB and KH are thus equal
τοῦ Ε καὶ τὸ ΚΘ τοῦ Ζ. ἰσάκις δὲ ὑπόκειται πολλαπλάσιον multiples of E and F (respectively) [Prop. 5.2]. And AB
τὸ ΑΒ τοῦ Ε καὶ τὸ ΓΔ τοῦ Ζ· ἴσάκις ἄρα ἐστὶ πολλαπλάσιον and CD are assumed (to be) equal multiples of E and F
τὸ ΚΘ τοῦ Ζ καὶ τὸ ΓΔ τοῦ Ζ. ἐπεὶ οὖν ἑκάτερον τῶν ΚΘ, (respectively). Thus, KH and CD are equal multiples of
ΓΔ τοῦ Ζ ἰσάκις ἐστὶ πολλαπλάσιον, ἴσον ἄρα ἐστὶ τὸ ΚΘ F and F (respectively). Therefore, KH and CD are each
τῷ ΓΔ. κοινὸν ἀφῃρήσθω τὸ ΓΘ· λοιπὸν ἄρα τὸ ΚΓ λοιπῷ equal multiples of F. Thus, KH is equal to CD. Let CH
τῷ ΘΔ ἴσον ἐστίν. ἀλλὰ τὸ Ζ τῷ ΚΓ ἐστιν ἴσον· καὶ τὸ have be taken away from both. Thus, the remainder KC
ΘΔ ἄρα τῷ Ζ ἴσον ἐστίν. ὥστε εἰ τὸ ΗΒ τῷ Ε ἴσον ἐστίν, is equal to the remainder HD. But, F is equal to KC.
καὶ τὸ ΘΔ ἴσον ἔσται τῷ Ζ. Thus, HD is also equal to F. Hence, if GB is equal to E
῾Ομοίως δὴ δείξομεν, ὅτι, κᾂν πολλαπλάσιον ᾖ τὸ ΗΒ then HD will also be equal to F.
τοῦ Ε, τοσαυταπλάσιον ἔσται καὶ τὸ ΘΔ τοῦ Ζ. So, similarly, we can show that even if GB is a multi-
᾿Εὰν ἄρα δύο μεγέθη δύο μεγεθῶν ἰσάκις ᾖ πολ- ple of E then HD will also be the same multiple of F.
λαπλάσια, καὶ ἀφαιρεθέντα τινὰ τῶν αὐτῶν ἰσάκις ᾖ πολ- Thus, if two magnitudes are equal multiples of two
λαπλάσια, καὶ τὰ λοιπὰ τοῖς αὐτοῖς ἤτοι ἴσα ἐστὶν ἢ ἰσάκις (other) magnitudes, and some (parts) taken away (from
αὐτῶν πολλαπλάσια· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. the former magnitudes) are equal multiples of the latter
(magnitudes, respectively), then the remainders are also
either equal to the latter (magnitudes), or (are) equal
multiples of them (respectively). (Which is) the very
thing it was required to show.
†
In modern notation, this proposition reads m α − n α = (m − n) α.
zþ. Proposition 7
Τὰ ἴσα πρὸς τὸ αὐτὸ τὸν αὐτὸν ἔχει λόγον καὶ τὸ αὐτὸ Equal (magnitudes) have the same ratio to the same
πρὸς τὰ ἴσα. (magnitude), and the latter (magnitude has the same ra-
῎Εστω ἴσα μεγέθη τὰ Α, Β, ἄλλο δέ τι, ὃ ἔτυχεν, tio) to the equal (magnitudes).
μέγεθος τὸ Γ· λέγω, ὅτι ἑκάτερον τῶν Α, Β πρὸς τὸ Γ Let A and B be equal magnitudes, and C some other
τὸν αὐτὸν ἔχει λόγον, καὶ τὸ Γ πρὸς ἑκάτερον τῶν Α, Β. random magnitude. I say that A and B each have the
137
STOIQEIWN eþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 5
same ratio to C, and (that) C (has the same ratio) to
each of A and B.
Ζ
Α ∆
Β Ε
Γ
D
B
A
C F
E
Εἰλήφθω γὰρ τῶν μὲν Α, Β ἰσάκις πολλαπλάσια τὰ Δ, For let the equal multiples D and E have been taken
Ε, τοῦ δὲ Γ ἄλλο, ὃ ἔτυχεν, πολλαπλάσιον τὸ Ζ. of A and B (respectively), and the other random multiple
᾿Επεὶ οὖν ἰσάκις ἐστὶ πολλαπλάσιον τὸ Δ τοῦ Α καὶ τὸ F of C.
Ε τοῦ Β, ἴσον δὲ τὸ Α τῷ Β, ἴσον ἄρα καὶ τὸ Δ τῷ Ε. ἄλλο Therefore, since D and E are equal multiples of A
δέ, ὅ ἔτυχεν, τὸ Ζ. Εἰ ἄρα ὑπερέχει τὸ Δ τοῦ Ζ, ὑπερέχει and B (respectively), and A (is) equal to B, D (is) thus
καὶ τὸ Ε τοῦ Ζ, καὶ εἰ ἴσον, ἴσον, καὶ εἰ ἔλαττον, ἔλαττον. also equal to E. And F (is) different, at random. Thus, if
καί ἐστι τὰ μὲν Δ, Ε τῶν Α, Β ἰσάκις πολλαπλάσια, τὸ δὲ D exceeds F then E also exceeds F, and if (D is) equal
Ζ τοῦ Γ ἄλλο, ὃ ἔτυχεν, πολλαπλάσιον· ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς τὸ Α (to F then E is also) equal (to F), and if (D is) less
πρὸς τὸ Γ, οὕτως τὸ Β πρὸς τὸ Γ. (than F then E is also) less (than F). And D and E are
Λέγω [δή], ὅτι καὶ τὸ Γ πρὸς ἑκάτερον τῶν Α, Β τὸν equal multiples of A and B (respectively), and F another
αὐτὸν ἔχει λόγον. random multiple of C. Thus, as A (is) to C, so B (is) to
Τῶν γὰρ αὐτῶν κατασκευασθέντων ὁμοίως δείξομεν, C [Def. 5.5].
ὅτι ἴσον ἐστὶ τὸ Δ τῷ Ε· ἄλλο δέ τι τὸ Ζ· εἰ ἄρα ὑπερέχει [So] I say that C
† also has the same ratio to each of A
τὸ Ζ τοῦ Δ, ὑπερέχει καὶ τοῦ Ε, καὶ εἰ ἴσον, ἴσον, καὶ εἰ and B.
ἔλαττον, ἔλαττον. καί ἐστι τὸ μὲν Ζ τοῦ Γ πολλαπλάσιον, For, similarly, we can show, by the same construction,
τὰ δὲ Δ, Ε τῶν Α, Β ἄλλα, ἃ ἔτυχεν, ἰσάκις πολλαπλάσια· that D is equal to E. And F (has) some other (value).
ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς τὸ Γ πρὸς τὸ Α, οὕτως τὸ Γ πρὸς τὸ Β. Thus, if F exceeds D then it also exceeds E, and if (F is)
Τὰ ἴσα ἄρα πρὸς τὸ αὐτὸ τὸν αὐτὸν ἔχει λόγον καὶ τὸ equal (to D then it is also) equal (to E), and if (F is) less
αὐτὸ πρὸς τὰ ἴσα. (than D then it is also) less (than E). And F is a multiple
of C, and D and E other random equal multiples of A
and B. Thus, as C (is) to A, so C (is) to B [Def. 5.5].
Thus, equal (magnitudes) have the same ratio to the
same (magnitude), and the latter (magnitude has the
same ratio) to the equal (magnitudes).
Pìrisma. Corollary‡
᾿Εκ δὴ τούτου φανερόν, ὅτι ἐὰν μεγέθη τινὰ ἀνάλογον So (it is) clear, from this, that if some magnitudes are
ᾖ, καὶ ἀνάπαλιν ἀνάλογον ἔσται. ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. proportional then they will also be proportional inversely.
(Which is) the very thing it was required to show.
† The Greek text has “E”, which is obviously a mistake.
‡
In modern notation, this corollary reads that if α : β :: γ : δ then β : α :: δ : γ.
hþ. Proposition 8
Τῶν ἀνίσων μεγεθῶν τὸ μεῖζον πρὸς τὸ αὐτὸ μείζονα For unequal magnitudes, the greater (magnitude) has
λόγον ἔχει ἤπερ τὸ ἔλαττον. καὶ τὸ αὐτὸ πρὸς τὸ ἔλαττον a greater ratio than the lesser to the same (magnitude).
μείζονα λόγον ἔχει ἤπερ πρὸς τὸ μεῖζον. And the latter (magnitude) has a greater ratio to the
῎Εστω ἄνισα μεγέθη τὰ ΑΒ, Γ, καὶ ἔστω μεῖζον τὸ ΑΒ, lesser (magnitude) than to the greater.
ἄλλο δέ, ὃ ἔτυχεν, τὸ Δ· λέγω, ὅτι τὸ ΑΒ πρὸς τὸ Δ Let AB and C be unequal magnitudes, and let AB be
μείζονα λόγον ἔχει ἤπερ τὸ Γ πρὸς τὸ Δ, καὶ τὸ Δ πρὸς the greater (of the two), and D another random magniτὸ Γ μείζονα λόγον ἔχει ἤπερ πρὸς τὸ ΑΒ. tude. I say that AB has a greater ratio to D than C (has)
to D, and (that) D has a greater ratio to C than (it has)
to AB.
138
STOIQEIWN eþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 5
G
A E B A E B
Z H J Z H J
G
K
D
L
M
N N
M
L
D
K
C
A B A E B E
K
D
L
M
N N
M
L
D
K
F G H F G H
C
᾿Επεὶ γὰρ μεῖζόν ἐστι τὸ ΑΒ τοῦ Γ, κείσθω τῷ Γ ἴσον For since AB is greater than C, let BE be made equal
τὸ ΒΕ· τὸ δὴ ἔλασσον τῶν ΑΕ, ΕΒ πολλαπλασιαζόμενον to C. So, the lesser of AE and EB, being multiplied, will
ἔσται ποτὲ τοῦ Δ μεῖζον. ἔστω πρότερον τὸ ΑΕ ἔλαττον sometimes be greater than D [Def. 5.4]. First of all, let
τοῦ ΕΒ, καὶ πεπολλαπλασιάσθω τὸ ΑΕ, καὶ ἔστω αὐτοῦ AE be less than EB, and let AE have been multiplied,
πολλαπλάσιον τὸ ΖΗ μεῖζον ὂν τοῦ Δ, καὶ ὁσαπλάσιόν ἐστι and let FG be a multiple of it which (is) greater than
τὸ ΖΗ τοῦ ΑΕ, τοσαυταπλάσιον γεγονέτω καὶ τὸ μὲν ΗΘ D. And as many times as FG is (divisible) by AE, so
τοῦ ΕΒ τὸ δὲ Κ τοῦ Γ· καὶ εἰλήφθω τοῦ Δ διπλάσιον μὲν many times let GH also have become (divisible) by EB,
τὸ Λ, τριπλάσιον δὲ τὸ Μ, καὶ ἑξῆς ἑνὶ πλεῖον, ἕως ἂν τὸ and K by C. And let the double multiple L of D have
λαμβανόμενον πολλαπλάσιον μὲν γένηται τοῦ Δ, πρώτως δὲ been taken, and the triple multiple M, and several more,
μεῖζον τοῦ Κ. εἰλήφθω, καὶ ἔστω τὸ Ν τετραπλάσιον μὲν (each increasing) in order by one, until the (multiple)
τοῦ Δ, πρώτως δὲ μεῖζον τοῦ Κ. taken becomes the first multiple of D (which is) greater
᾿Επεὶ οὖν τὸ Κ τοῦ Ν πρώτως ἐστὶν ἔλαττον, τὸ Κ ἄρα than K. Let it have been taken, and let it also be the
τοῦ Μ οὔκ ἐστιν ἔλαττον. καὶ ἐπεὶ ἰσάκις ἐστὶ πολλαπλάσιον quadruple multiple N of D—the first (multiple) greater
τὸ ΖΗ τοῦ ΑΕ καὶ τὸ ΗΘ τοῦ ΕΒ, ἰσάκις ἄρα ἐστὶ πολ- than K.
λαπλάσιον τὸ ΖΗ τοῦ ΑΕ καὶ τὸ ΖΘ τοῦ ΑΒ. ἰσάκις δέ Therefore, since K is less than N first, K is thus not
ἐστι πολλαπλάσιον τὸ ΖΗ τοῦ ΑΕ καὶ τὸ Κ τοῦ Γ· ἰσάκις less than M. And since FG and GH are equal multiἄρα ἐστὶ πολλαπλάσιον τὸ ΖΘ τοῦ ΑΒ καὶ τὸ Κ τοῦ Γ. τὰ ples of AE and EB (respectively), FG and FH are thus
ΖΘ, Κ ἄρα τῶν ΑΒ, Γ ἰσάκις ἐστὶ πολλαπλάσια. πάλιν, ἐπεὶ equal multiples of AE and AB (respectively) [Prop. 5.1].
ἰσάκις ἐστὶ πολλαπλάσιον τὸ ΗΘ τοῦ ΕΒ καὶ τὸ Κ τοῦ Γ, And FG and K are equal multiples of AE and C (reἴσον δὲ τὸ ΕΒ τῷ Γ, ἴσον ἄρα καὶ τὸ ΗΘ τῷ Κ. τὸ δὲ Κ spectively). Thus, FH and K are equal multiples of AB
τοῦ Μ οὔκ ἐστιν ἔλαττον· οὐδ᾿ ἄρα τὸ ΗΘ τοῦ Μ ἔλαττόν and C (respectively). Thus, FH, K are equal multiples
ἐστιν. μεῖζον δὲ τὸ ΖΗ τοῦ Δ· ὅλον ἄρα τὸ ΖΘ συναμ- of AB, C. Again, since GH and K are equal multiples
φοτέρων τῶν Δ, Μ μεῖζόν ἐστιν. ἀλλὰ συναμφότερα τὰ Δ, of EB and C, and EB (is) equal to C, GH (is) thus also
Μ τῷ Ν ἐστιν ἴσα, ἐπειδήπερ τὸ Μ τοῦ Δ τριπλάσιόν ἐστιν, equal to K. And K is not less than M. Thus, GH not less
συναμφότερα δὲ τὰ Μ, Δ τοῦ Δ ἐστι τετραπλάσια, ἔστι δὲ than M either. And FG (is) greater than D. Thus, the
καὶ τὸ Ν τοῦ Δ τετραπλάσιον· συναμφότερα ἄρα τὰ Μ, Δ whole of FH is greater than D and M (added) together.
τῷ Ν ἴσα ἐστίν. ἀλλὰ τὸ ΖΘ τῶν Μ, Δ μεῖζόν ἐστιν· τὸ But, D and M (added) together is equal to N, inasmuch
ΖΘ ἄρα τοῦ Ν ὑπερέχει· τὸ δὲ Κ τοῦ Ν οὐχ ὑπερέχει. καί as M is three times D, and M and D (added) together is
ἐστι τὰ μὲν ΖΘ, Κ τῶν ΑΒ, Γ ἰσάκις πολλαπλάσια, τὸ δὲ Ν four times D, and N is also four times D. Thus, M and D
τοῦ Δ ἄλλο, ὃ ἔτυχεν, πολλαπλάσιον· τὸ ΑΒ ἄρα πρὸς τὸ (added) together is equal to N. But, FH is greater than
Δ μείζονα λόγον ἔχει ἤπερ τὸ Γ πρὸς τὸ Δ. M and D. Thus, FH exceeds N. And K does not exceed
Λέγω δή, ὅτι καὶ τὸ Δ πρὸς τὸ Γ μείζονα λόγον ἔχει N. And FH, K are equal multiples of AB, C, and N
ἤπερ τὸ Δ πρὸς τὸ ΑΒ. another random multiple of D. Thus, AB has a greater
Τῶν γὰρ αὐτῶν κατασκευασθέντων ὁμοίως δείξομεν, ratio to D than C (has) to D [Def. 5.7].
ὅτι τὸ μὲν Ν τοῦ Κ ὑπερέχει, τὸ δὲ Ν τοῦ ΖΘ οὐχ ὑπερέχει. So, I say that D also has a greater ratio to C than D
καί ἐστι τὸ μὲν Ν τοῦ Δ πολλαπλάσιον, τὰ δὲ ΖΘ, Κ τῶν (has) to AB.
ΑΒ, Γ ἄλλα, ἃ ἔτυχεν, ἰσάκις πολλαπλάσια· τὸ Δ ἄρα πρὸς For, similarly, by the same construction, we can show
τὸ Γ μείζονα λόγον ἔχει ἤπερ τὸ Δ πρὸς τὸ ΑΒ. that N exceeds K, and N does not exceed FH. And
᾿Αλλὰ δὴ τὸ ΑΕ τοῦ ΕΒ μεῖζον ἔστω. τὸ δὴ ἔλαττον N is a multiple of D, and FH, K other random equal
τὸ ΕΒ πολλαπλασιαζόμενον ἔσται ποτὲ τοῦ Δ μεῖζον. πε- multiples of AB, C (respectively). Thus, D has a greater
139
STOIQEIWN eþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 5
πολλαπλασιάσθω, καὶ ἔστω τὸ ΗΘ πολλαπλάσιον μὲν τοῦ ratio to C than D (has) to AB [Def. 5.5].
ΕΒ, μεῖζον δὲ τοῦ Δ· καὶ ὁσαπλάσιόν ἐστι τὸ ΗΘ τοῦ ΕΒ, And so let AE be greater than EB. So, the lesser,
τοσαυταπλάσιον γεγονέτω καὶ τὸ μὲν ΖΗ τοῦ ΑΕ, τὸ δὲ Κ EB, being multiplied, will sometimes be greater than D.
τοῦ Γ. ὁμοίως δὴ δείξομεν, ὅτι τὰ ΖΘ, Κ τῶν ΑΒ, Γ ἰσάκις Let it have been multiplied, and let GH be a multiple of
ἐστὶ πολλαπλάσια· καὶ εἰλήφθω ὁμοίως τὸ Ν πολλαπλάσιον EB (which is) greater than D. And as many times as
μὲν τοῦ Δ, πρώτως δὲ μεῖζον τοῦ ΖΗ· ὥστε πάλιν τὸ ΖΗ GH is (divisible) by EB, so many times let FG also have
τοῦ Μ οὔκ ἐστιν ἔλασσον. μεῖζον δὲ τὸ ΗΘ τοῦ Δ· ὅλον become (divisible) by AE, and K by C. So, similarly
ἄρα τὸ ΖΘ τῶν Δ, Μ, τουτέστι τοῦ Ν, ὑπερέχει. τὸ δὲ Κ (to the above), we can show that FH and K are equal
τοῦ Ν οὐχ ὑπερέχει, ἐπειδήπερ καὶ τὸ ΖΗ μεῖζον ὂν τοῦ multiples of AB and C (respectively). And, similarly (to
ΗΘ, τουτέστι τοῦ Κ, τοῦ Ν οὐχ ὑπερέχει. καὶ ὡσαύτως the above), let the multiple N of D, (which is) the first
κατακολουθοῦντες τοῖς ἐπάνω περαίνομεν τὴν ἀπόδειξιν. (multiple) greater than FG, have been taken. So, FG
Τῶν ἄρα ἀνίσων μεγεθῶν τὸ μεῖζον πρὸς τὸ αὐτὸ is again not less than M. And GH (is) greater than D.
μείζονα λόγον ἔχει ἤπερ τὸ ἔλαττον· καὶ τὸ αὐτὸ πρὸς τὸ Thus, the whole of FH exceeds D and M, that is to say
ἔλαττον μείζονα λόγον ἔχει ἤπερ πρὸς τὸ μεῖζον· ὅπερ ἔδει N. And K does not exceed N, inasmuch as FG, which
δεῖξαι. (is) greater than GH—that is to say, K—also does not
exceed N. And, following the above (arguments), we
(can) complete the proof in the same manner.
Thus, for unequal magnitudes, the greater (magnitude) has a greater ratio than the lesser to the same (magnitude). And the latter (magnitude) has a greater ratio to
the lesser (magnitude) than to the greater. (Which is) the
very thing it was required to show.
jþ. Proposition 9
Τὰ πρὸς τὸ αὐτὸ τὸν αὐτὸν ἔχοντα λὸγον ἴσα ἀλλήλοις (Magnitudes) having the same ratio to the same
ἐστίν· καὶ πρὸς ἃ τὸ αὐτὸ τὸν αὐτὸν ἕχει λόγον, ἐκεῖνα ἴσα (magnitude) are equal to one another. And those (magἐστίν. nitudes) to which the same (magnitude) has the same
ratio are equal.
Β
Γ
Α B
C
A
᾿Εχέτω γὰρ ἑκάτερον τῶν Α, Β πρὸς τὸ Γ τὸν αὐτὸν For let A and B each have the same ratio to C. I say
λόγον· λέγω, ὅτι ἴσον ἐστὶ τὸ Α τῷ Β. that A is equal to B.
Εἰ γὰρ μή, οὐκ ἂν ἑκάτερον τῶν Α, Β πρὸς τὸ Γ τὸν For if not, A and B would not each have the same
αὐτὸν εἶχε λόγον· ἔχει δέ· ἴσον ἄρα ἐστὶ τὸ Α τῷ Β. ratio to C [Prop. 5.8]. But they do. Thus, A is equal to
᾿Εχέτω δὴ πάλιν τὸ Γ πρὸς ἑκάτερον τῶν Α, Β τὸν αὐτὸν B.
λόγον· λέγω, ὅτι ἴσον ἐστὶ τὸ Α τῷ Β. So, again, let C have the same ratio to each of A and
Εἰ γὰρ μή, οὐκ ἂν τὸ Γ πρὸς ἑκάτερον τῶν Α, Β τὸν B. I say that A is equal to B.
αὐτὸν εἶχε λόγον· ἔχει δέ· ἴσον ἄρα ἐστὶ τὸ Α τῷ Β. For if not, C would not have the same ratio to each of
Τὰ ἄρα πρὸς τὸ αὐτὸ τὸν αὐτὸν ἔχοντα λόγον ἴσα A and B [Prop. 5.8]. But it does. Thus, A is equal to B.
ἀλλήλοις ἐστίν· καὶ πρὸς ἃ τὸ αὐτὸ τὸν αὐτὸν ἔχει λόγον, Thus, (magnitudes) having the same ratio to the same
ἐκεῖνα ἴσα ἐστίν· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. (magnitude) are equal to one another. And those (magnitudes) to which the same (magnitude) has the same ratio
are equal. (Which is) the very thing it was required to
show.
iþ. Proposition 10
Τῶν πρὸς τὸ αὐτὸ λόγον ἐχόντων τὸ μείζονα λόγον For (magnitudes) having a ratio to the same (magἔχον ἐκεῖνο μεῖζόν ἐστιν· πρὸς ὃ δὲ τὸ αὐτὸ μείζονα λόγον nitude), that (magnitude which) has the greater ratio is
140
STOIQEIWN eþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 5
ἔχει, ἐκεῖνο ἔλαττόν ἐστιν. (the) greater. And that (magnitude) to which the latter
(magnitude) has a greater ratio is (the) lesser.
Β
Γ
Α
C
A B
᾿Εχέτω γὰρ τὸ Α πρὸς τὸ Γ μείζονα λόγον ἤπερ τὸ Β For let A have a greater ratio to C than B (has) to C.
πρὸς τὸ Γ· λέγω, ὅτι μεῖζόν ἐστι τὸ Α τοῦ Β. I say that A is greater than B.
Εἰ γὰρ μή, ἤτοι ἴσον ἐστὶ τὸ Α τῷ Β ἢ ἔλασσον. ἴσον For if not, A is surely either equal to or less than B.
μὲν οὖν οὔκ ἐστὶ τὸ Α τῷ Β· ἑκάτερον γὰρ ἂν τῶν Α, Β In fact, A is not equal to B. For (then) A and B would
πρὸς τὸ Γ τὸν αὐτὸν εἶχε λόγον. οὐκ ἔχει δέ· οὐκ ἄρα ἴσον each have the same ratio to C [Prop. 5.7]. But they do
ἐστὶ τὸ Α τῷ Β. οὐδὲ μὴν ἔλασσόν ἐστι τὸ Α τοῦ Β· τὸ Α not. Thus, A is not equal to B. Neither, indeed, is A less
γὰρ ἂν πρὸς τὸ Γ ἐλάσσονα λόγον εἶχεν ἤπερ τὸ Β πρὸς τὸ than B. For (then) A would have a lesser ratio to C than
Γ. οὐκ ἔχει δέ· οὐκ ἄρα ἔλασσόν ἐστι τὸ Α τοῦ Β. ἐδείχθη B (has) to C [Prop. 5.8]. But it does not. Thus, A is not
δὲ οὐδὲ ἴσον· μεῖζον ἄρα ἐστὶ τὸ Α τοῦ Β. less than B. And it was shown not (to be) equal either.
᾿Εχέτω δὴ πάλιν τὸ Γ πρὸς τὸ Β μείζονα λόγον ἤπερ τὸ Thus, A is greater than B.
Γ πρὸς τὸ Α· λέγω, ὅτι ἔλασσόν ἐστι τὸ Β τοῦ Α. So, again, let C have a greater ratio to B than C (has)
Εἰ γὰρ μή, ἤτοι ἴσον ἐστὶν ἢ μεῖζον. ἴσον μὲν οὖν οὔκ to A. I say that B is less than A.
ἐστι τὸ Β τῷ Α· τὸ Γ γὰρ ἂν πρὸς ἑκάτερον τῶν Α, Β τὸν For if not, (it is) surely either equal or greater. In fact,
αὐτὸν εἶχε λόγον. οὐκ ἔχει δέ· οὐκ ἄρα ἴσον ἐστὶ τὸ Α B is not equal to A. For (then) C would have the same
τῷ Β. οὐδὲ μὴν μεῖζόν ἐστι τὸ Β τοῦ Α· τὸ Γ γὰρ ἂν πρὸς ratio to each of A and B [Prop. 5.7]. But it does not.
τὸ Β ἐλάσσονα λόγον εἶχεν ἤπερ πρὸς τὸ Α. οὐκ ἔχει δέ· Thus, A is not equal to B. Neither, indeed, is B greater
οὐκ ἄρα μεῖζόν ἐστι τὸ Β τοῦ Α. ἐδείχθη δέ, ὅτι οὐδὲ ἴσον· than A. For (then) C would have a lesser ratio to B than
ἔλαττον ἄρα ἐστὶ τὸ Β τοῦ Α. (it has) to A [Prop. 5.8]. But it does not. Thus, B is not
Τῶν ἄρα πρὸς τὸ αὐτὸ λόγον ἐχόντων τὸ μείζονα λόγον greater than A. And it was shown that (it is) not equal
ἔχον μεῖζόν ἐστιν· καὶ πρὸς ὃ τὸ αὐτὸ μείζονα λόγον ἔχει, (to A) either. Thus, B is less than A.
ἐκεῖνο ἔλαττόν ἐστιν· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. Thus, for (magnitudes) having a ratio to the same
(magnitude), that (magnitude which) has the greater
ratio is (the) greater. And that (magnitude) to which
the latter (magnitude) has a greater ratio is (the) lesser.
(Which is) the very thing it was required to show.
iaþ. Proposition 11†
Οἱ τῷ αὐτῷ λόγῳ οἱ αὐτοὶ καὶ ἀλλήλοις εἰσὶν οἱ αὐτοί. (Ratios which are) the same with the same ratio are
also the same with one another.
Α Ε
Β
Η
Λ
Γ
∆
Θ
Μ Ν
Κ
Ζ
N
G
A
B
L
H
M
D
C E
F
K
῎Εστωσαν γὰρ ὡς μὲν τὸ Α πρὸς τὸ Β, οὕτως τὸ Γ πρὸς For let it be that as A (is) to B, so C (is) to D, and as
τὸ Δ, ὡς δὲ τὸ Γ πρὸς τὸ Δ, οὕτως τὸ Ε πρὸς τὸ Ζ· λέγω, C (is) to D, so E (is) to F. I say that as A is to B, so E
ὅτι ἐστὶν ὡς τὸ Α πρὸς τὸ Β, οὕτως τὸ Ε πρὸς τὸ Ζ. (is) to F.
Εἰλήφθω γὰρ τῶν Α, Γ, Ε ἰσάκις πολλαπλάσια τὰ Η, Θ, For let the equal multiples G, H, K have been taken
Κ, τῶν δὲ Β, Δ, Ζ ἄλλα, ἃ ἔτυχεν, ἰσάκις πολλαπλάσια τὰ of A, C, E (respectively), and the other random equal
Λ, Μ, Ν. multiples L, M, N of B, D, F (respectively).
Καὶ ἐπεί ἐστιν ὡς τὸ Α πρὸς τὸ Β, οὕτως τὸ Γ πρὸς τὸ And since as A is to B, so C (is) to D, and the equal
Δ, καὶ εἴληπται τῶν μὲν Α, Γ ἰσάκις πολλαπλάσια τὰ Η, Θ, multiples G and H have been taken of A and C (respecτῶν δὲ Β, Δ ἄλλα, ἃ ἔτυχεν, ἰσάκις πολλαπλάσια τὰ Λ, Μ, tively), and the other random equal multiples L and M
εἰ ἄρα ὑπερέχει τὸ Η τοῦ Λ, ὑπερέχει καὶ τὸ Θ τοῦ Μ, καὶ εἰ of B and D (respectively), thus if G exceeds L then H
ἴσον ἐστίν, ἴσον, καὶ εἰ ἐλλείπει, ἐλλείπει. πάλιν, ἐπεί ἐστιν also exceeds M, and if (G is) equal (to L then H is also)
141
STOIQEIWN eþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 5
ὡς τὸ Γ πρὸς τὸ Δ, οὕτως τὸ Ε πρὸς τὸ Ζ, καὶ εἴληπται equal (to M), and if (G is) less (than L then H is also)
τῶν Γ, Ε ἰσάκις πολλαπλάσια τὰ Θ, Κ, τῶν δὲ Δ, Ζ ἄλλα, less (than M) [Def. 5.5]. Again, since as C is to D, so
ἃ ἔτυχεν, ἰσάκις πολλαπλάσια τὰ Μ, Ν, εἰ ἄρα ὑπερέχει τὸ E (is) to F, and the equal multiples H and K have been
Θ τοῦ Μ, ὑπερέχει καὶ τὸ Κ τοῦ Ν, καὶ εἰ ἴσον, ἴσον, καὶ εἰ taken of C and E (respectively), and the other random
ἔλλατον, ἔλαττον. ἀλλὰ εἰ ὑπερεῖχε τὸ Θ τοῦ Μ, ὑπερεῖχε equal multiples M and N of D and F (respectively), thus
καὶ τὸ Η τοῦ Λ, καὶ εἰ ἴσον, ἴσον, καὶ εἰ ἔλαττον, ἔλαττον· if H exceeds M then K also exceeds N, and if (H is)
ὥστε καὶ εἰ ὑπερέχει τὸ Η τοῦ Λ, ὑπερέχει καὶ τὸ Κ τοῦ equal (to M then K is also) equal (to N), and if (H is)
Ν, καὶ εἰ ἴσον, ἴσον, καὶ εἰ ἔλαττον, ἔλαττον. καί ἐστι τὰ less (than M then K is also) less (than N) [Def. 5.5]. But
μὲν Η, Κ τῶν Α, Ε ἰσάκις πολλαπλάσια, τὰ δὲ Λ, Ν τῶν Β, (we saw that) if H was exceeding M then G was also exΖ ἄλλα, ἃ ἔτυχεν, ἰσάκις πολλαπλάσια· ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς τὸ Α ceeding L, and if (H was) equal (to M then G was also)
πρὸς τὸ Β, οὕτως τὸ Ε πρὸς τὸ Ζ. equal (to L), and if (H was) less (than M then G was
Οἱ ἄρα τῷ αὐτῷ λόγῳ οἱ αὐτοὶ καὶ ἀλλήλοις εἰσὶν οἱ also) less (than L). And, hence, if G exceeds L then K
αὐτοί· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. also exceeds N, and if (G is) equal (to L then K is also)
equal (to N), and if (G is) less (than L then K is also)
less (than N). And G and K are equal multiples of A
and E (respectively), and L and N other random equal
multiples of B and F (respectively). Thus, as A is to B,
so E (is) to F [Def. 5.5].
Thus, (ratios which are) the same with the same ratio
are also the same with one another. (Which is) the very
thing it was required to show.
†
In modern notation, this proposition reads that if α : β :: γ : δ and γ : δ :: ǫ : ζ then α : β :: ǫ : ζ.
ibþ. Proposition 12†
᾿Εὰν ᾖ ὁποσαοῦν μεγέθη ἀνάλογον, ἔσται ὡς ἓν τῶν If there are any number of magnitudes whatsoever
ἡγουμένων πρὸς ἓν τῶν ἑπομένων, οὕτως ἅπαντα τὰ (which are) proportional then as one of the leading (magἡγούμενα πρὸς ἅπαντα τὰ ἑπόμενα. nitudes is) to one of the following, so will all of the leading (magnitudes) be to all of the following.
Ε
Β ∆ Ζ
Λ
Μ
Κ Ν
Θ
Η
Α Γ
N
A C E
B D F
G
H
K
L
M
῎Εστωσαν ὁποσαοῦν μεγέθη ἀνάλογον τὰ Α, Β, Γ, Δ, Let there be any number of magnitudes whatsoever,
Ε, Ζ, ὡς τὸ Α πρὸς τὸ Β, οὕτως τὸ Γ πρὸς τὸ Δ, καὶ τὸ Ε A, B, C, D, E, F, (which are) proportional, (so that) as
πρὸς το Ζ· λέγω, ὅτι ἐστὶν ὡς τὸ Α πρὸς τὸ Β, οὕτως τὰ A (is) to B, so C (is) to D, and E to F. I say that as A is
Α, Γ, Ε πρὸς τὰ Β, Δ, Ζ. to B, so A, C, E (are) to B, D, F.
Εἰλήφθω γὰρ τῶν μὲν Α, Γ, Ε ἰσάκις πολλαπλάσια τὰ Η, For let the equal multiples G, H, K have been taken
Θ, Κ, τῶν δὲ Β, Δ, Ζ ἄλλα, ἃ ἔτυχεν, ἰσάκις πολλαπλάσια of A, C, E (respectively), and the other random equal
τὰ Λ, Μ, Ν. multiples L, M, N of B, D, F (respectively).
Καὶ ἐπεί ἐστιν ὡς τὸ Α πρὸς τὸ Β, οὕτως τὸ Γ πρὸς τὸ And since as A is to B, so C (is) to D, and E to F, and
Δ, καὶ τὸ Ε πρὸς τὸ Ζ, καὶ εἴληπται τῶν μὲν Α, Γ, Ε ἰσάκις the equal multiples G, H, K have been taken of A, C, E
πολλαπλάσια τὰ Η, Θ, Κ τῶν δὲ Β, Δ, Ζ ἄλλα, ἃ ἔτυχεν, (respectively), and the other random equal multiples L,
ἰσάκις πολλαπλάσια τὰ Λ, Μ, Ν, εἰ ἄρα ὑπερέχει τὸ Η τοῦ Λ, M, N of B, D, F (respectively), thus if G exceeds L then
ὑπερέχει καὶ τὸ Θ τοῦ Μ, καὶ τὸ Κ τοῦ Ν, καὶ εἰ ἴσον, ἴσον, H also exceeds M, and K (exceeds) N, and if (G is)
καὶ εἰ ἔλαττον, ἔλαττον. ὥστε καὶ εἰ ὑπερέχει τὸ Η τοῦ Λ, equal (to L then H is also) equal (to M, and K to N),
142
STOIQEIWN eþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 5
ὑπερέχει καὶ τὰ Η, Θ, Κ τῶν Λ, Μ, Ν, καὶ εἰ ἴσον, ἴσα, καὶ and if (G is) less (than L then H is also) less (than M,
εἰ ἔλαττον, ἔλαττονα. καί ἐστι τὸ μὲν Η καὶ τὰ Η, Θ, Κ and K than N) [Def. 5.5]. And, hence, if G exceeds L
τοῦ Α καὶ τῶν Α, Γ, Ε ἰσάκις πολλαπλάσια, ἐπειδήπερ ἐὰν then G, H, K also exceed L, M, N, and if (G is) equal
ᾖ ὁποσαοῦν μεγέθη ὁποσωνοῦν μεγεθῶν ἴσων τὸ πλῆθος (to L then G, H, K are also) equal (to L, M, N) and
ἕκαστον ἑκάστου ἰσάκις πολλαπλάσιον, ὁσαπλάσιόν ἐστιν if (G is) less (than L then G, H, K are also) less (than
ἓν τῶν μεγεθῶν ἑνός, τοσαυταπλάσια ἔσται καὶ τὰ πάντα L, M, N). And G and G, H, K are equal multiples of
τῶν πάντων. διὰ τὰ αὐτὰ δὴ καὶ τὸ Λ καὶ τὰ Λ, Μ, Ν τοῦ A and A, C, E (respectively), inasmuch as if there are
Β καὶ τῶν Β, Δ, Ζ ἰσάκις ἐστὶ πολλαπλάσια· ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς any number of magnitudes whatsoever (which are) equal
τὸ Α πρὸς τὸ Β, οὕτως τὰ Α, Γ, Ε πρὸς τὰ Β, Δ, Ζ. multiples, respectively, of some (other) magnitudes, of
᾿Εὰν ἄρα ᾖ ὁποσαοῦν μεγέθη ἀνάλογον, ἔσται ὡς ἓν equal number (to them), then as many times as one of the
τῶν ἡγουμένων πρὸς ἓν τῶν ἑπομένων, οὕτως ἅπαντα τὰ (first) magnitudes is (divisible) by one (of the second),
ἡγούμενα πρὸς ἅπαντα τὰ ἑπόμενα· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. so many times will all (of the first magnitudes) also (be
divisible) by all (of the second) [Prop. 5.1]. So, for the
same (reasons), L and L, M, N are also equal multiples
of B and B, D, F (respectively). Thus, as A is to B, so
A, C, E (are) to B, D, F (respectively).
Thus, if there are any number of magnitudes whatsoever (which are) proportional then as one of the leading
(magnitudes is) to one of the following, so will all of the
leading (magnitudes) be to all of the following. (Which
is) the very thing it was required to show.
†
In modern notation, this proposition reads that if α : α
′
:: β : β
′
:: γ : γ
′
etc. then α : α
′
:: (α + β + γ + · · · ) : (α
′ + β
′ + γ
′ + · · · ).
igþ. Proposition 13†
᾿Εὰν πρῶτον πρὸς δεύτερον τὸν αὐτὸν ἒχῃ λόγον καὶ If a first (magnitude) has the same ratio to a second
τρίτον πρὸς τέταρτον, τρίτον δὲ πρὸς τέταρτον μείζονα that a third (has) to a fourth, and the third (magnitude)
λόγον ἔχῃ ἢ πέμπτον πρὸς ἕκτον, καὶ πρῶτον πρὸς δεύτερον has a greater ratio to the fourth than a fifth (has) to a
μείζονα λόγον ἕξει ἢ πέμπτον πρὸς ἕκτον. sixth, then the first (magnitude) will also have a greater
ratio to the second than the fifth (has) to the sixth.
Λ
Α
Β
Μ
Ν
Γ
∆
Η
Κ
Ε
Ζ
Θ
L
M
N
A
B
C
D
G
K
E
F
H
Πρῶτον γὰρ τὸ Α πρὸς δεύτερον τὸ Β τὸν αὐτὸν ἐχέτω For let a first (magnitude) A have the same ratio to a
λόγον καὶ τρίτον τὸ Γ πρὸς τέταρτον τὸ Δ, τρίτον δὲ τὸ Γ second B that a third C (has) to a fourth D, and let the
πρὸς τέταρτον τὸ Δ μείζονα λόγον ἐχέτω ἢ πέμπτον τὸ Ε third (magnitude) C have a greater ratio to the fourth
πρὸς ἕκτον τὸ Ζ. λέγω, ὅτι καὶ πρῶτον τὸ Α πρὸς δεύτερον D than a fifth E (has) to a sixth F. I say that the first
τὸ Β μείζονα λόγον ἕξει ἤπερ πέμπτον τὸ Ε πρὸς ἕκτον τὸ (magnitude) A will also have a greater ratio to the second
Ζ. B than the fifth E (has) to the sixth F.
᾿Επεὶ γὰρ ἔστι τινὰ τῶν μὲν Γ, Ε ἰσάκις πολλαπλάσια, For since there are some equal multiples of C and
τῶν δὲ Δ, Ζ ἄλλα, ἃ ἔτυχεν, ἰσάκις πολλαπλάσια, καὶ τὸ μὲν E, and other random equal multiples of D and F, (for
τοῦ Γ πολλαπλάσιον τοῦ τοῦ Δ πολλαπλασίου ὑπερέχει, which) the multiple of C exceeds the (multiple) of D,
τὸ δὲ τοῦ Ε πολλαπλάσιον τοῦ τοῦ Ζ πολλαπλασίου οὐχ and the multiple of E does not exceed the multiple of F
ὑπερέχει, εἰλήφθω, καὶ ἔστω τῶν μὲν Γ, Ε ἰσάκις πολ- [Def. 5.7], let them have been taken. And let G and H be
λαπλάσια τὰ Η, Θ, τῶν δὲ Δ, Ζ ἄλλα, ἃ ἔτυχεν, ἰσάκις equal multiples of C and E (respectively), and K and L
πολλαπλάσια τὰ Κ, Λ, ὥστε τὸ μὲν Η τοῦ Κ ὑπερέχειν, τὸ other random equal multiples of D and F (respectively),
δὲ Θ τοῦ Λ μὴ ὑπερέχειν· καὶ ὁσαπλάσιον μέν ἐστι τὸ Η such that G exceeds K, but H does not exceed L. And as
τοῦ Γ, τοσαυταπλάσιον ἔστω καὶ τὸ Μ τοῦ Α, ὁσαπλάσιον many times as G is (divisible) by C, so many times let M
δὲ τὸ Κ τοῦ Δ, τοσαυταπλάσιον ἔστω καὶ τὸ Ν τοῦ Β. be (divisible) by A. And as many times as K (is divisible)
143
STOIQEIWN eþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 5
Καὶ ἐπεί ἐστιν ὡς τὸ Α πρὸς τὸ Β, οὕτως τὸ Γ πρὸς by D, so many times let N be (divisible) by B.
τὸ Δ, καὶ εἴληπται τῶν μὲν Α, Γ ἰσάκις πολλαπλάσια τὰ And since as A is to B, so C (is) to D, and the equal
Μ, Η, τῶν δὲ Β, Δ ἄλλα, ἃ ἔτυχεν, ἰσάκις πολλαπλάσια τὰ multiples M and G have been taken of A and C (respecΝ, Κ, εἰ ἄρα ὑπερέχει τὸ Μ τοῦ Ν, ὑπερέχει καὶ τὸ Η τοῦ tively), and the other random equal multiples N and K
Κ, καὶ εἰ ἴσον, ἴσον, καὶ εἰ ἔλαττον, ἔλλατον. ὑπερέχει δὲ of B and D (respectively), thus if M exceeds N then G
τὸ Η τοῦ Κ· ὑπερέχει ἄρα καὶ τὸ Μ τοῦ Ν. τὸ δὲ Θ τοῦ exceeds K, and if (M is) equal (to N then G is also)
Λ οὐχ ὑπερέχει· καί ἐστι τὰ μὲν Μ, Θ τῶν Α, Ε ἰσάκις equal (to K), and if (M is) less (than N then G is also)
πολλαπλάσια, τὰ δὲ Ν, Λ τῶν Β, Ζ ἄλλα, ἃ ἔτυχεν, ἰσάκις less (than K) [Def. 5.5]. And G exceeds K. Thus, M
πολλαπλάσια· τὸ ἄρα Α πρὸς τὸ Β μείζονα λόγον ἔχει ἤπερ also exceeds N. And H does not exceeds L. And M and
τὸ Ε πρὸς τὸ Ζ. H are equal multiples of A and E (respectively), and N
᾿Εὰν ἄρα πρῶτον πρὸς δεύτερον τὸν αὐτὸν ἒχῃ λόγον and L other random equal multiples of B and F (respecκαὶ τρίτον πρὸς τέταρτον, τρίτον δὲ πρὸς τέταρτον μείζονα tively). Thus, A has a greater ratio to B than E (has) to
λόγον ἔχῃ ἢ πέμπτον πρὸς ἕκτον, καὶ πρῶτον πρὸς δεύτερον F [Def. 5.7].
μείζονα λόγον ἕξει ἢ πέμπτον πρὸς ἕκτον· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. Thus, if a first (magnitude) has the same ratio to a
second that a third (has) to a fourth, and a third (magnitude) has a greater ratio to a fourth than a fifth (has)
to a sixth, then the first (magnitude) will also have a
greater ratio to the second than the fifth (has) to the
sixth. (Which is) the very thing it was required to show.
†
In modern notation, this proposition reads that if α : β :: γ : δ and γ : δ > ǫ : ζ then α : β > ǫ : ζ.
idþ. Proposition 14†
᾿Εὰν πρῶτον πρὸς δεύτερον τὸν αὐτὸν ἔχῃ λόγον καὶ If a first (magnitude) has the same ratio to a second
τρίτον πρὸς τέταρτον, τὸ δὲ πρῶτον τοῦ τρίτου μεῖζον ᾖ, that a third (has) to a fourth, and the first (magnitude)
καὶ τὸ δεύτερον τοῦ τετάρτου μεῖζον ἔσται, κἂν ἴσον, ἴσον, is greater than the third, then the second will also be
κἂν ἔλαττον, ἔλαττον. greater than the fourth. And if (the first magnitude is)
equal (to the third then the second will also be) equal (to
the fourth). And if (the first magnitude is) less (than the
third then the second will also be) less (than the fourth).
∆
Α
Β
Γ A C
B D
Πρῶτον γὰρ τὸ Α πρὸς δεύτερον τὸ Β αὐτὸν ἐχέτω For let a first (magnitude) A have the same ratio to a
λόγον καὶ τρίτον τὸ Γ πρὸς τέταρτον τὸ Δ, μεῖζον δὲ ἔστω second B that a third C (has) to a fourth D. And let A be
τὸ Α τοῦ Γ· λέγω, ὅτι καὶ τὸ Β τοῦ Δ μεῖζόν ἐστιν. greater than C. I say that B is also greater than D.
᾿Επεὶ γὰρ τὸ Α τοῦ Γ μεῖζόν ἐστιν, ἄλλο δέ, ὃ ἔτυχεν, For since A is greater than C, and B (is) another ran-
[μέγεθος] τὸ Β, τὸ Α ἄρα πρὸς τὸ Β μείζονα λόγον ἔχει dom [magnitude], A thus has a greater ratio to B than C
ἤπερ τὸ Γ πρὸς τὸ Β. ὡς δὲ τὸ Α πρὸς τὸ Β, οὕτως τὸ (has) to B [Prop. 5.8]. And as A (is) to B, so C (is) to
Γ πρὸς τὸ Δ· καὶ τὸ Γ ἄρα πρὸς τὸ Δ μείζονα λόγον ἔχει D. Thus, C also has a greater ratio to D than C (has) to
ἤπερ τὸ Γ πρὸς τὸ Β. πρὸς ὃ δὲ τὸ αὐτὸ μείζονα λόγον B. And that (magnitude) to which the same (magnitude)
ἔχει, ἐκεῖνο ἔλασσόν ἐστιν· ἔλασσον ἄρα τὸ Δ τοῦ Β· ὥστε has a greater ratio is the lesser [Prop. 5.10]. Thus, D (is)
μεῖζόν ἐστι τὸ Β τοῦ Δ. less than B. Hence, B is greater than D.
῾Ομοίως δὴ δεῖξομεν, ὅτι κἂν ἴσον ᾖ τὸ Α τῷ Γ, ἴσον So, similarly, we can show that even if A is equal to C
ἔσται καὶ τὸ Β τῷ Δ, κἄν ἔλασσον ᾖ τὸ Α τοῦ Γ, ἔλασσον then B will also be equal to D, and even if A is less than
ἔσται καὶ τὸ Β τοῦ Δ. C then B will also be less than D.
᾿Εὰν ἄρα πρῶτον πρὸς δεύτερον τὸν αὐτὸν ἔχῃ λόγον Thus, if a first (magnitude) has the same ratio to a
καὶ τρίτον πρὸς τέταρτον, τὸ δὲ πρῶτον τοῦ τρίτου μεῖζον ᾖ, second that a third (has) to a fourth, and the first (magκαὶ τὸ δεύτερον τοῦ τετάρτου μεῖζον ἔσται, κἂν ἴσον, ἴσον, nitude) is greater than the third, then the second will also
κἂν ἔλαττον, ἔλαττον· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. be greater than the fourth. And if (the first magnitude is)
144
STOIQEIWN eþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 5
equal (to the third then the second will also be) equal (to
the fourth). And if (the first magnitude is) less (than the
third then the second will also be) less (than the fourth).
(Which is) the very thing it was required to show.
†
In modern notation, this proposition reads that if α : β :: γ : δ then α T γ as β T δ.
ieþ. Proposition 15†
Τὰ μέρη τοῖς ὡσαύτως πολλαπλασίοις τὸν αὐτὸν ἔχει Parts have the same ratio as similar multiples, taken
λόγον ληφθέντα κατάλληλα. in corresponding order.
Ε
Α Η Θ
Γ
Ζ
∆ Κ Λ
Β
E
A G H
D K L
F
C
B
῎Εστω γὰρ ἰσάκις πολλαπλάσιον τὸ ΑΒ τοῦ Γ καὶ το ΔΕ For let AB and DE be equal multiples of C and F
τοῦ Ζ· λέγω, ὅτι ἐστὶν ὡς τὸ Γ πρὸς τὸ Ζ, οὕτως τὸ ΑΒ (respectively). I say that as C is to F, so AB (is) to DE.
πρὸς τὸ ΔΕ. For since AB and DE are equal multiples of C and
᾿Επεὶ γὰρ ἰσάκις ἐστὶ πολλαπλάσιον τὸ ΑΒ τοῦ Γ καὶ F (respectively), thus as many magnitudes as there are
τὸ ΔΕ τοῦ Ζ, ὅσα ἄρα ἐστὶν ἐν τῷ ΑΒ μεγέθη ἴσα τῷ in AB equal to C, so many (are there) also in DE equal
Γ, τοσαῦτα καὶ ἐν τῷ ΔΕ ἴσα τῷ Ζ. διῃρήσθω τὸ μὲν ΑΒ to F. Let AB have been divided into (magnitudes) AG,
εἰς τὰ τῷ Γ ἴσα τὰ ΑΗ, ΗΘ, ΘΒ, τὸ δὲ ΔΕ εἰς τὰ τῷ Ζ GH, HB, equal to C, and DE into (magnitudes) DK,
ἴσα τὰ ΔΚ, ΚΛ, ΛΕ· ἔσται δὴ ἴσον τὸ πλῆθος τῶν ΑΗ, KL, LE, equal to F. So, the number of (magnitudes)
ΗΘ, ΘΒ τῷ πλήθει τῶν ΔΚ, ΚΛ, ΛΕ. καὶ ἐπεὶ ἴσα ἐστὶ τὰ AG, GH, HB will equal the number of (magnitudes)
ΑΗ, ΗΘ, ΘΒ ἀλλήλοις, ἔστι δὲ καὶ τὰ ΔΚ, ΚΛ, ΛΕ ἴσα DK, KL, LE. And since AG, GH, HB are equal to one
ἀλλήλοις, ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς τὸ ΑΗ πρὸς τὸ ΔΚ, οὕτως τὸ ΗΘ another, and DK, KL, LE are also equal to one another,
πρὸς τὸ ΚΛ, καὶ τὸ ΘΒ πρὸς τὸ ΛΕ. ἔσται ἄρα καὶ ὡς ἓν thus as AG is to DK, so GH (is) to KL, and HB to LE
τῶν ἡγουμένων πρὸς ἓν τῶν ἑπομένων, οὕτως ἅπαντα τὰ [Prop. 5.7]. And, thus (for proportional magnitudes), as
ἡγουμένα πρὸς ἅπαντα τὰ ἑπόμενα· ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς τὸ ΑΗ one of the leading (magnitudes) will be to one of the folπρὸς τὸ ΔΚ, οὕτως τὸ ΑΒ πρὸς τὸ ΔΕ. ἴσον δὲ τὸ μὲν ΑΗ lowing, so all of the leading (magnitudes will be) to all of
τῷ Γ, τὸ δὲ ΔΚ τῷ Ζ· ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς τὸ Γ πρὸς τὸ Ζ οὕτως the following [Prop. 5.12]. Thus, as AG is to DK, so AB
τὸ ΑΒ πρὸς τὸ ΔΕ. (is) to DE. And AG is equal to C, and DK to F. Thus,
Τὰ ἄρα μέρη τοῖς ὡσαύτως πολλαπλασίοις τὸν αὐτὸν as C is to F, so AB (is) to DE.
ἔχει λόγον ληφθέντα κατάλληλα· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. Thus, parts have the same ratio as similar multiples,
taken in corresponding order. (Which is) the very thing
it was required to show.
†
In modern notation, this proposition reads that α : β :: m α : m β.
iþ. Proposition 16†
᾿Εὰν τέσσαρα μεγέθη ἀνάλογον ᾖ, καὶ ἐναλλὰξ ἀνάλογον If four magnitudes are proportional then they will also
ἔσται. be proportional alternately.
῎Εστω τέσσαρα μεγέθη ἀνάλογον τὰ Α, Β, Γ, Δ, ὡς τὸ Let A, B, C and D be four proportional magnitudes,
Α πρὸς τὸ Β, οὕτως τὸ Γ πρὸς τὸ Δ· λέγω, ὅτι καὶ ἐναλλὰξ (such that) as A (is) to B, so C (is) to D. I say that they
[ἀνάλογον] ἔσται, ὡς τὸ Α πρὸς τὸ Γ, οὕτως τὸ Β πρὸς τὸ will also be [proportional] alternately, (so that) as A (is)
Δ. to C, so B (is) to D.
Εἰλήφθω γὰρ τῶν μὲν Α, Β ἰσάκις πολλαπλάσια τὰ Ε, For let the equal multiples E and F have been taken
Ζ, τῶν δὲ Γ, Δ ἄλλα, ἃ ἔτυχεν, ἰσάκις πολλαπλάσια τὰ Η, of A and B (respectively), and the other random equal
Θ. multiples G and H of C and D (respectively).
145
STOIQEIWN eþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 5
Θ
Α
Β
Ε
Ζ
Γ
∆
Η
H
A
B
E
F
C
D
G
Καὶ ἐπεὶ ἰσάκις ἐστὶ πολλαπλάσιον τὸ Ε τοῦ Α καὶ τὸ Ζ And since E and F are equal multiples of A and B
τοῦ Β, τὰ δὲ μέρη τοῖς ὡσαύτως πολλαπλασίοις τὸν αὐτὸν (respectively), and parts have the same ratio as similar
ἔχει λόγον, ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς τὸ Α πρὸς τὸ Β, οὕτως τὸ Ε πρὸς multiples [Prop. 5.15], thus as A is to B, so E (is) to F.
τὸ Ζ. ὡς δὲ τὸ Α πρὸς τὸ Β, οὕτως τὸ Γ πρὸς τὸ Δ· καὶ ὡς But as A (is) to B, so C (is) to D. And, thus, as C (is)
ἄρα τὸ Γ πρὸς τὸ Δ, οὕτως τὸ Ε πρὸς τὸ Ζ. πάλιν, ἐπεὶ τὰ to D, so E (is) to F [Prop. 5.11]. Again, since G and H
Η, Θ τῶν Γ, Δ ἰσάκις ἐστὶ πολλαπλάσια, ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς τὸ Γ are equal multiples of C and D (respectively), thus as C
πρὸς τὸ Δ, οὕτως τὸ Η πρὸς τὸ Θ. ὡς δὲ τὸ Γ πρὸς τὸ Δ, is to D, so G (is) to H [Prop. 5.15]. But as C (is) to D,
[οὕτως] τὸ Ε πρὸς τὸ Ζ· καὶ ὡς ἄρα τὸ Ε πρὸς τὸ Ζ, οὕτως [so] E (is) to F. And, thus, as E (is) to F, so G (is) to
τὸ Η πρὸς τὸ Θ. ἐὰν δὲ τέσσαρα μεγέθη ἀνάλογον ᾖ, τὸ δὲ H [Prop. 5.11]. And if four magnitudes are proportional,
πρῶτον τοῦ τρίτου μεῖζον ᾖ, καὶ τὸ δεύτερον τοῦ τετάρτου and the first is greater than the third then the second will
μεῖζον ἔσται, κἂν ἴσον, ἴσον, κἄν ἔλαττον, ἔλαττον. εἰ ἄρα also be greater than the fourth, and if (the first is) equal
ὑπερέχει τὸ Ε τοῦ Η, ὑπερέχει καὶ τὸ Ζ τοῦ Θ, καὶ εἰ ἴσον, (to the third then the second will also be) equal (to the
ἴσον, καὶ εἰ ἔλαττον, ἔλαττον. καί ἐστι τὰ μὲν Ε, Ζ τῶν fourth), and if (the first is) less (than the third then the
Α, Β ἰσάκις πολλαπλάσια, τὰ δὲ Η, Θ τῶν Γ, Δ ἄλλα, ἃ second will also be) less (than the fourth) [Prop. 5.14].
ἔτυχεν, ἰσάκις πολλαπλάσια· ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς τὸ Α πρὸς τὸ Γ, Thus, if E exceeds G then F also exceeds H, and if (E is)
οὕτως τὸ Β πρὸς τὸ Δ. equal (to G then F is also) equal (to H), and if (E is) less
᾿Εὰν ἄρα τέσσαρα μεγέθη ἀνάλογον ᾖ, καὶ ἐναλλὰξ (than G then F is also) less (than H). And E and F are
ἀνάλογον ἔσται· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. equal multiples of A and B (respectively), and G and H
other random equal multiples of C and D (respectively).
Thus, as A is to C, so B (is) to D [Def. 5.5].
Thus, if four magnitudes are proportional then they
will also be proportional alternately. (Which is) the very
thing it was required to show.
†
In modern notation, this proposition reads that if α : β :: γ : δ then α : γ :: β : δ.
izþ. Proposition 17†
᾿Εὰν συγκείμενα μεγέθη ἀνάλογον ᾖ, καὶ διαιρεθέντα If composed magnitudes are proportional then they
ἀνάλογον ἔσται. will also be proportional (when) separarted.
Α Β ∆ Γ
Η Θ Κ Ξ
Ε Ζ
Λ Μ Ν Π
K
A E B F D
H
M N P
G O
L
C
῎Εστω συγκείμενα μεγέθη ἀνάλογον τὰ ΑΒ, ΒΕ, ΓΔ, Let AB, BE, CD, and DF be composed magnitudes
ΔΖ, ὡς τὸ ΑΒ πρὸς τὸ ΒΕ, οὕτως τὸ ΓΔ πρὸς τὸ ΔΖ· (which are) proportional, (so that) as AB (is) to BE, so
λέγω, ὅτι καὶ διαιρεθέντα ἀνάλογον ἔσται, ὡς τὸ ΑΕ πρὸς CD (is) to DF. I say that they will also be proportional
τὸ ΕΒ, οὕτως τὸ ΓΖ πρὸς τὸ ΔΖ. (when) separated, (so that) as AE (is) to EB, so CF (is)
Εἰλήφθω γὰρ τῶν μὲν ΑΕ, ΕΒ, ΓΖ, ΖΔ ἰσάκις πολ- to DF.
λαπλάσια τὰ ΗΘ, ΘΚ, ΛΜ, ΜΝ, τῶν δὲ ΕΒ, ΖΔ ἄλλα, ἃ For let the equal multiples GH, HK, LM, and MN
ἔτυχεν, ἰσάκις πολλαπλάσια τὰ ΚΞ, ΝΠ. have been taken of AE, EB, CF, and FD (respectively),
Καὶ ἐπεὶ ἰσάκις ἐστὶ πολλαπλάσιον τὸ ΗΘ τοῦ ΑΕ καὶ and the other random equal multiples KO and NP of
τὸ ΘΚ τοῦ ΕΒ, ἰσάκις ἄρα ἐστὶ πολλαπλάσιον τὸ ΗΘ τοῦ EB and FD (respectively).
146
STOIQEIWN eþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 5
ΑΕ καὶ τὸ ΗΚ τοῦ ΑΒ. ἰσάκις δέ ἐστι πολλαπλάσιον τὸ ΗΘ And since GH and HK are equal multiples of AE and
τοῦ ΑΕ καὶ τὸ ΛΜ τοῦ ΓΖ· ἰσάκις ἄρα ἐστὶ πολλαπλάσιον EB (respectively), GH and GK are thus equal multiples
τὸ ΗΚ τοῦ ΑΒ καὶ τὸ ΛΜ τοῦ ΓΖ. πάλιν, ἐπεὶ ἰσάκις ἐστὶ of AE and AB (respectively) [Prop. 5.1]. But GH and
πολλαπλάσιον τὸ ΛΜ τοῦ ΓΖ καὶ τὸ ΜΝ τοῦ ΖΔ, ἰσάκις ἄρα LM are equal multiples of AE and CF (respectively).
ἐστὶ πολλαπλάσιον τὸ ΛΜ τοῦ ΓΖ καὶ τὸ ΛΝ τοῦ ΓΔ. ἰσάκις Thus, GK and LM are equal multiples of AB and CF
δὲ ἦν πολλαπλάσιον τὸ ΛΜ τοῦ ΓΖ καὶ τὸ ΗΚ τοῦ ΑΒ· (respectively). Again, since LM and MN are equal mulἰσάκις ἄρα ἐστὶ πολλαπλάσιον τὸ ΗΚ τοῦ ΑΒ καὶ τὸ ΛΝ τοῦ tiples of CF and FD (respectively), LM and LN are thus
ΓΔ. τὰ ΗΚ, ΛΝ ἄρα τῶν ΑΒ, ΓΔ ἰσάκις ἐστὶ πολλαπλάσια. equal multiples of CF and CD (respectively) [Prop. 5.1].
πάλιν, ἐπεὶ ἰσάκις ἐστὶ πολλαπλασίον τὸ ΘΚ τοῦ ΕΒ καὶ τὸ And LM and GK were equal multiples of CF and AB
ΜΝ τοῦ ΖΔ, ἔστι δὲ καὶ τὸ ΚΞ τοῦ ΕΒ ἰσάκις πολλαπλάσιον (respectively). Thus, GK and LN are equal multiples
καὶ τὸ ΝΠ τοῦ ΖΔ, καὶ συντεθὲν τὸ ΘΞ τοῦ ΕΒ ἰσάκις ἐστὶ of AB and CD (respectively). Thus, GK, LN are equal
πολλαπλάσιον καὶ τὸ ΜΠ τοῦ ΖΔ. καὶ ἐπεί ἐστιν ὡς τὸ ΑΒ multiples of AB, CD. Again, since HK and MN are
πρὸς τὸ ΒΕ, οὕτως τὸ ΓΔ πρὸς τὸ ΔΖ, καὶ εἴληπται τῶν equal multiples of EB and FD (respectively), and KO
μὲν ΑΒ, ΓΔ ἰσάκις πολλαπλάσια τὰ ΗΚ, ΛΝ, τῶν δὲ ΕΒ, and NP are also equal multiples of EB and FD (respecΖΔ ἰσάκις πολλαπλάσια τὰ ΘΞ, ΜΠ, εἰ ἄρα ὑπερέχει τὸ tively), then, added together, HO and MP are also equal
ΗΚ τοῦ ΘΞ, ὑπερέχει καὶ τὸ ΛΝ τοῦ ΜΠ, καὶ εἰ ἴσον, ἴσον, multiples of EB and FD (respectively) [Prop. 5.2]. And
καὶ εἰ ἔλαττον, ἔλαττον. ὑπερεχέτω δὴ τὸ ΗΚ τοῦ ΘΞ, since as AB (is) to BE, so CD (is) to DF, and the equal
καὶ κοινοῦ ἀφαιρεθέντος τοῦ ΘΚ ὑπερέχει ἄρα καὶ τὸ ΗΘ multiples GK, LN have been taken of AB, CD, and the
τοῦ ΚΞ. ἀλλα εἰ ὑπερεῖχε τὸ ΗΚ τοῦ ΘΞ ὑπερεῖχε καὶ τὸ equal multiples HO, MP of EB, FD, thus if GK exceeds
ΛΝ τοῦ ΜΠ· ὑπερέχει ἄρα καὶ τὸ ΛΝ τοῦ ΜΠ, καὶ κοινοῦ HO then LN also exceeds MP, and if (GK is) equal (to
ἀφαιρεθέντος τοῦ ΜΝ ὑπερέχει καὶ τὸ ΛΜ τοῦ ΝΠ· ὥστε HO then LN is also) equal (to MP), and if (GK is) less
εἰ ὑπερέχει τὸ ΗΘ τοῦ ΚΞ, ὑπερέχει καὶ τὸ ΛΜ τοῦ ΝΠ. (than HO then LN is also) less (than MP) [Def. 5.5].
ὁμοίως δὴ δεῖξομεν, ὅτι κἂν ἴσον ᾖ τὸ ΗΘ τῷ ΚΞ, ἴσον So let GK exceed HO, and thus, HK being taken away
ἔσται καὶ τὸ ΛΜ τῷ ΝΠ, κἂν ἔλαττον, ἔλαττον. καί ἐστι τὰ from both, GH exceeds KO. But (we saw that) if GK
μὲν ΗΘ, ΛΜ τῶν ΑΕ, ΓΖ ἰσάκις πολλαπλάσια, τὰ δὲ ΚΞ, was exceeding HO then LN was also exceeding MP.
ΝΠ τῶν ΕΒ, ΖΔ ἄλλα, ἃ ἔτυχεν, ἰσάκις πολλαπλάσια· ἔστιν Thus, LN also exceeds MP, and, MN being taken away
ἄρα ὡς τὸ ΑΕ πρὸς τὸ ΕΒ, οὕτως τὸ ΓΖ πρὸς τὸ ΖΔ. from both, LM also exceeds NP. Hence, if GH exceeds
᾿Εὰν ἄρα συγκείμενα μεγέθη ἀνάλογον ᾖ, καὶ διαι- KO then LM also exceeds NP. So, similarly, we can
ρεθέντα ἀνάλογον ἔσται· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. show that even if GH is equal to KO then LM will also
be equal to NP, and even if (GH is) less (than KO then
LM will also be) less (than NP). And GH, LM are equal
multiples of AE, CF, and KO, NP other random equal
multiples of EB, FD. Thus, as AE is to EB, so CF (is)
to FD [Def. 5.5].
Thus, if composed magnitudes are proportional then
they will also be proportional (when) separarted. (Which
is) the very thing it was required to show.
†
In modern notation, this proposition reads that if α + β : β :: γ + δ : δ then α : β :: γ : δ.
ihþ. Proposition 18†
᾿Εὰν διῃρημένα μεγέθη ἀνάλογον ᾖ, καὶ συντεθέντα If separated magnitudes are proportional then they
ἀνάλογον ἔσται. will also be proportional (when) composed.
Γ
Α Β
∆
Ε
Ζ Η C
A B
F G D
E
῎Εστω διῃρημένα μεγέθη ἀνάλογον τὰ ΑΕ, ΕΒ, ΓΖ, ΖΔ, Let AE, EB, CF, and FD be separated magnitudes
ὡς τὸ ΑΕ πρὸς τὸ ΕΒ, οὕτως τὸ ΓΖ πρὸς τὸ ΖΔ· λέγω, (which are) proportional, (so that) as AE (is) to EB, so
ὅτι καὶ συντεθέντα ἀνάλογον ἔσται, ὡς τὸ ΑΒ πρὸς τὸ ΒΕ, CF (is) to FD. I say that they will also be proportional
147
STOIQEIWN eþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 5
οὕτως τὸ ΓΔ πρὸς τὸ ΖΔ. (when) composed, (so that) as AB (is) to BE, so CD (is)
Εἰ γὰρ μή ἐστὶν ὡς τὸ ΑΒ πρὸς τὸ ΒΕ, οὕτως τὸ ΓΔ to FD.
πρὸς τὸ ΔΖ, ἔσται ὡς τὸ ΑΒ πρὸς τὸ ΒΕ, οὕτως τὸ ΓΔ For if (it is) not (the case that) as AB is to BE, so
ἤτοι πρὸς ἔλασσόν τι τοῦ ΔΖ ἢ πρὸς μεῖζον. CD (is) to FD, then it will surely be (the case that) as
῎Εστω πρότερον πρὸς ἔλασσον τὸ ΔΗ. καὶ ἐπεί ἐστιν ὡς AB (is) to BE, so CD is either to some (magnitude) less
τὸ ΑΒ πρὸς τὸ ΒΕ, οὕτως τὸ ΓΔ πρὸς τὸ ΔΗ, συγκείμενα than DF, or (some magnitude) greater (than DF).‡
μεγέθη ἀνάλογόν ἐστιν· ὥστε καὶ διαιρεθέντα ἀνάλογον Let it, first of all, be to (some magnitude) less (than
ἔσται. ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς τὸ ΑΕ πρὸς τὸ ΕΒ, οὕτως τὸ ΓΗ πρὸς DF), (namely) DG. And since composed magnitudes
τὸ ΗΔ. ὑπόκειται δὲ καὶ ὡς τὸ ΑΕ πρὸς τὸ ΕΒ, οὕτως τὸ are proportional, (so that) as AB is to BE, so CD (is) to
ΓΖ πρὸς τὸ ΖΔ. καὶ ὡς ἄρα τὸ ΓΗ πρὸς τὸ ΗΔ, οὕτως τὸ DG, they will thus also be proportional (when) separated
ΓΖ πρὸς τὸ ΖΔ. μεῖζον δὲ τὸ πρῶτον τὸ ΓΗ τοῦ τρίτου τοῦ [Prop. 5.17]. Thus, as AE is to EB, so CG (is) to GD.
ΓΖ· μεῖζον ἄρα καὶ τὸ δεύτερον τὸ ΗΔ τοῦ τετάρτου τοῦ But it was also assumed that as AE (is) to EB, so CF
ΖΔ. ἀλλὰ καὶ ἔλαττον· ὅπερ ἐστὶν ἀδύνατον· οὐκ ἄρα ἐστὶν (is) to FD. Thus, (it is) also (the case that) as CG (is)
ὡς τὸ ΑΒ πρὸς τὸ ΒΕ, οὕτως τὸ ΓΔ πρὸς ἔλασσον τοῦ to GD, so CF (is) to FD [Prop. 5.11]. And the first
ΖΔ. ὁμοίως δὴ δείξομεν, ὅτι οὐδὲ πρὸς μεῖζον· πρὸς αὐτὸ (magnitude) CG (is) greater than the third CF. Thus,
ἄρα. the second (magnitude) GD (is) also greater than the
᾿Εὰν ἄρα διῃρημένα μεγέθη ἀνάλογον ᾖ, καὶ συντεθέντα fourth FD [Prop. 5.14]. But (it is) also less. The very
ἀνάλογον ἔσται· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. thing is impossible. Thus, (it is) not (the case that) as AB
is to BE, so CD (is) to less than FD. Similarly, we can
show that neither (is it the case) to greater (than FD).
Thus, (it is the case) to the same (as FD).
Thus, if separated magnitudes are proportional then
they will also be proportional (when) composed. (Which
is) the very thing it was required to show.
†
In modern notation, this proposition reads that if α : β :: γ : δ then α + β : β :: γ + δ : δ.
‡ Here, Euclid assumes, without proof, that a fourth magnitude proportional to three given magnitudes can always be found.
ijþ. Proposition 19†
᾿Εὰν ᾖ ὡς ὅλον πρὸς ὅλον, οὕτως ἀφαιρεθὲν πρὸς ἀφαι- If as the whole is to the whole so the (part) taken
ρεθέν, καὶ τὸ λοιπὸν πρὸς τὸ λοιπὸν ἔσται ὡς ὅλον πρὸς away is to the (part) taken away then the remainder to
ὅλον. the remainder will also be as the whole (is) to the whole.
Α Β
Γ
Ε
Ζ ∆ D
A
C
E
F
B
῎Εστω γὰρ ὡς ὅλον τὸ ΑΒ πρὸς ὅλον τὸ ΓΔ, οὕτως For let the whole AB be to the whole CD as the (part)
ἀφαιρεθὲν τὸ ΑΕ πρὸς ἀφειρεθὲν τὸ ΓΖ· λέγω, ὅτι καὶ taken away AE (is) to the (part) taken away CF. I say
λοιπὸν τὸ ΕΒ πρὸς λοιπὸν τὸ ΖΔ ἔσται ὡς ὅλον τὸ ΑΒ that the remainder EB to the remainder FD will also be
πρὸς ὅλον τὸ ΓΔ. as the whole AB (is) to the whole CD.
᾿Επεὶ γάρ ἐστιν ὡς τὸ ΑΒ πρὸς τὸ ΓΔ, οὕτως τὸ ΑΕ For since as AB is to CD, so AE (is) to CF, (it is)
πρὸς τὸ ΓΖ, καὶ ἐναλλὰξ ὡς τὸ ΒΑ πρὸς τὸ ΑΕ, οὕτως also (the case), alternately, (that) as BA (is) to AE, so
τὸ ΔΓ πρὸς τὸ ΓΖ. καὶ ἐπεὶ συγκείμενα μεγέθη ἀνάλογόν DC (is) to CF [Prop. 5.16]. And since composed magniἐστιν, καὶ διαιρεθέντα ἀνάλογον ἔσται, ὡς τὸ ΒΕ πρὸς τὸ tudes are proportional then they will also be proportional
ΕΑ, οὕτως τὸ ΔΖ πρὸς τὸ ΓΖ· καὶ ἐναλλάξ, ὡς τὸ ΒΕ πρὸς (when) separated, (so that) as BE (is) to EA, so DF (is)
τὸ ΔΖ, οὕτως τὸ ΕΑ πρὸς τὸ ΖΓ. ὡς δὲ τὸ ΑΕ πρὸς τὸ ΓΖ, to CF [Prop. 5.17]. Also, alternately, as BE (is) to DF,
οὕτως ὑπόκειται ὅλον τὸ ΑΒ πρὸς ὅλον τὸ ΓΔ. καὶ λοιπὸν so EA (is) to FC [Prop. 5.16]. And it was assumed that
ἄρα τὸ ΕΒ πρὸς λοιπὸν τὸ ΖΔ ἔσται ὡς ὅλον τὸ ΑΒ πρὸς as AE (is) to CF, so the whole AB (is) to the whole CD.
ὅλον τὸ ΓΔ. And, thus, as the remainder EB (is) to the remainder
᾿Εὰν ἄρα ᾖ ὡς ὅλον πρὸς ὅλον, οὕτως ἀφαιρεθὲν πρὸς FD, so the whole AB will be to the whole CD.
148
STOIQEIWN eþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 5
ἀφαιρεθέν, καὶ τὸ λοιπὸν πρὸς τὸ λοιπὸν ἔσται ὡς ὅλον Thus, if as the whole is to the whole so the (part)
πρὸς ὅλον [ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι]. taken away is to the (part) taken away then the remain-
[Καὶ ἐπεὶ ἐδείχθη ὡς τὸ ΑΒ πρὸς τὸ ΓΔ, οὕτως τὸ ΕΒ der to the remainder will also be as the whole (is) to
πρὸς τὸ ΖΔ, καὶ ἐναλλὰξ ὡς τὸ ΑΒ πρὸς τὸ ΒΕ οὕτως τὸ the whole. [(Which is) the very thing it was required to
ΓΔ πρὸς τὸ ΖΔ, συγκείμενα ἄρα μεγέθη ἀνάλογόν ἐστιν· show.]
ἐδείχθη δὲ ὡς τὸ ΒΑ πρὸς τὸ ΑΕ, οὕτως τὸ ΔΓ πρὸς τὸ [And since it was shown (that) as AB (is) to CD, so
ΓΖ· καί ἐστιν ἀναστρέψαντι]. EB (is) to FD, (it is) also (the case), alternately, (that)
as AB (is) to BE, so CD (is) to FD. Thus, composed
magnitudes are proportional. And it was shown (that)
as BA (is) to AE, so DC (is) to CF. And (the latter) is
converted (from the former).]
Pìrisma. Corollary‡
᾿Εκ δὴ τούτου φανερόν, ὅτι ἐὰν συγκείμενα μεγέθη So (it is) clear, from this, that if composed magniἀνάλογον ᾖ, καὶ ἀναστρέψαντι ἀνάλογον ἔσται· ὅπερ ἔδει tudes are proportional then they will also be proportional
δεῖξαι. (when) converted. (Which is) the very thing it was required to show.
†
In modern notation, this proposition reads that if α : β :: γ : δ then α : β :: α − γ : β − δ.
‡
In modern notation, this corollary reads that if α : β :: γ : δ then α : α − β :: γ : γ − δ.
kþ. Proposition 20†
᾿Εὰν ᾖ τρία μεγέθη καὶ ἄλλα αὐτοῖς ἴσα τὸ πλῆθος, If there are three magnitudes, and others of equal
σύνδυο λαμβανόμενα καὶ ἐν τῷ αὐτῷ λόγω, δι᾿ ἴσου δὲ τὸ number to them, (being) also in the same ratio taken two
πρῶτον τοῦ τρίτου μεῖζον ᾖ, καὶ τὸ τέταρτον τοῦ ἕκτου by two, and (if), via equality, the first is greater than the
μεῖζον ἔσται, κἂν ἴσον, ἴσον, κἂν ἔλαττον, ἔλαττον. third then the fourth will also be greater than the sixth.
And if (the first is) equal (to the third then the fourth
will also be) equal (to the sixth). And if (the first is) less
(than the third then the fourth will also be) less (than the
sixth).
∆
Β
Γ
Ε
Ζ
Α
F
B
C
A D
E
῎Εστω τρία μεγέθη τὰ Α, Β, Γ, καὶ ἄλλα αὐτοῖς ἴσα τὸ Let A, B, and C be three magnitudes, and D, E, F
πλῆθος τὰ Δ, Ε, Ζ, σύνδυο λαμβανόμενα ἐν τῷ αὐτῷ λόγῳ, other (magnitudes) of equal number to them, (being) in
ὡς μὲν τὸ Α πρὸς τὸ Β, οὕτως τὸ Δ πρὸς τὸ Ε, ὡς δὲ τὸ Β the same ratio taken two by two, (so that) as A (is) to B,
πρὸς τὸ Γ, οὕτως τὸ Ε πρὸς τὸ Ζ, δι᾿ ἴσου δὲ μεῖζον ἔστω so D (is) to E, and as B (is) to C, so E (is) to F. And let
τὸ Α τοῦ Γ· λέγω, ὅτι καὶ τὸ Δ τοῦ Ζ μεῖζον ἔσται, κἂν A be greater than C, via equality. I say that D will also
ἴσον, ἴσον, κἂν ἔλαττον, ἔλαττον. be greater than F. And if (A is) equal (to C then D will
᾿Επεὶ γὰρ μεῖζόν ἐστι τὸ Α τοῦ Γ, ἄλλο δέ τι τὸ Β, τὸ δὲ also be) equal (to F). And if (A is) less (than C then D
μεῖζον πρὸς τὸ αὐτὸ μείζονα λόγον ἔχει ἤπερ τὸ ἔλαττον, will also be) less (than F).
τὸ Α ἄρα πρὸς τὸ Β μείζονα λόγον ἔχει ἤπερ τὸ Γ πρὸς τὸ For since A is greater than C, and B some other (magΒ. ἀλλ᾿ ὡς μὲν τὸ Α πρὸς τὸ Β [οὕτως] τὸ Δ πρὸς τὸ Ε, ὡς nitude), and the greater (magnitude) has a greater ratio
δὲ τὸ Γ πρὸς τὸ Β, ἀνάπαλιν οὕτως τὸ Ζ πρὸς τὸ Ε· καὶ τὸ than the lesser to the same (magnitude) [Prop. 5.8], A
Δ ἄρα πρὸς τὸ Ε μείζονα λόγον ἔχει ἤπερ τὸ Ζ πρὸς τὸ Ε. thus has a greater ratio to B than C (has) to B. But as A
τῶν δὲ πρὸς τὸ αὐτὸ λόγον ἐχόντων τὸ μείζονα λόγον ἔχον (is) to B, [so] D (is) to E. And, inversely, as C (is) to B,
μεῖζόν ἐστιν. μεῖζον ἄρα τὸ Δ τοῦ Ζ. ὁμοίως δὴ δείξομεν, so F (is) to E [Prop. 5.7 corr.]. Thus, D also has a greater
ὅτι κἂν ἴσον ᾖ τὸ Α τῷ Γ, ἴσον ἔσται καὶ τὸ Δ τῷ Ζ, κἂν ratio to E than F (has) to E [Prop. 5.13]. And for (mag149
STOIQEIWN eþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 5
ἔλαττον, ἔλαττον. nitudes) having a ratio to the same (magnitude), that
᾿Εὰν ἄρα ᾖ τρία μεγέθη καὶ ἄλλα αὐτοῖς ἴσα τὸ πλῆθος, having the greater ratio is greater [Prop. 5.10]. Thus,
σύνδυο λαμβανόμενα καὶ ἐν τῷ αὐτῷ λόγω, δι᾿ ἴσου δὲ τὸ D (is) greater than F. Similarly, we can show that even if
πρῶτον τοῦ τρίτου μεῖζον ᾖ, καὶ τὸ τέταρτον τοῦ ἕκτου A is equal to C then D will also be equal to F, and even
μεῖζον ἔσται, κἂν ἴσον, ἴσον, κἂν ἔλαττον, ἔλαττον· ὅπερ if (A is) less (than C then D will also be) less (than F).
ἔδει δεῖξαι. Thus, if there are three magnitudes, and others of
equal number to them, (being) also in the same ratio
taken two by two, and (if), via equality, the first is greater
than the third, then the fourth will also be greater than
the sixth. And if (the first is) equal (to the third then the
fourth will also be) equal (to the sixth). And (if the first
is) less (than the third then the fourth will also be) less
(than the sixth). (Which is) the very thing it was required
to show.
†
In modern notation, this proposition reads that if α : β :: δ : ǫ and β : γ :: ǫ : ζ then α T γ as δ T ζ.
kaþ. Proposition 21†
᾿Εὰν ᾖ τρία μεγέθη καὶ ἄλλα αὐτοῖς ἴσα τὸ πλῆθος If there are three magnitudes, and others of equal
σύνδυο λαμβανόμενα καὶ ἐν τῷ αὐτῷ λόγῳ, ᾖ δὲ τετα- number to them, (being) also in the same ratio taken two
ραγμένη αὐτῶν ἡ ἀναλογία, δι᾿ ἴσου δὲ τὸ πρῶτον τοῦ by two, and (if) their proportion (is) perturbed, and (if),
τρίτου μεῖζον ᾖ, καὶ τὸ τέταρτον τοῦ ἕκτου μεῖζον ἔσται, via equality, the first is greater than the third then the
κἂν ἴσον, ἴσον, κἂν ἔλαττον, ἔλαττον. fourth will also be greater than the sixth. And if (the first
is) equal (to the third then the fourth will also be) equal
(to the sixth). And if (the first is) less (than the third then
the fourth will also be) less (than the sixth).
Α
Β
Γ
Ε
Ζ
∆ D
B
A
C
E
F
῎Εστω τρία μεγέθη τὰ Α, Β, Γ καὶ ἄλλα αὐτοῖς ἴσα τὸ Let A, B, and C be three magnitudes, and D, E, F
πλῆθος τὰ Δ, Ε, Ζ, σύνδυο λαμβανόμενα καὶ ἐν τῷ αὐτῷ other (magnitudes) of equal number to them, (being) in
λόγῳ, ἔστω δὲ τεταραγμένη αὐτῶν ἡ ἀναλογία, ὡς μὲν τὸ the same ratio taken two by two. And let their proportion
Α πρὸς τὸ Β, οὕτως τὸ Ε πρὸς τὸ Ζ, ὡς δὲ τὸ Β πρὸς τὸ Γ, be perturbed, (so that) as A (is) to B, so E (is) to F, and
οὕτως τὸ Δ πρὸς τὸ Ε, δι᾿ ἴσου δὲ τὸ Α τοῦ Γ μεῖζον ἔστω· as B (is) to C, so D (is) to E. And let A be greater than
λέγω, ὅτι καὶ τὸ Δ τοῦ Ζ μεῖζον ἔσται, κἂν ἴσον, ἴσον, κἂν C, via equality. I say that D will also be greater than F.
ἒλαττον, ἒλαττον. And if (A is) equal (to C then D will also be) equal (to
᾿Επεὶ γὰρ μεῖζόν ἐστι τὸ Α τοῦ Γ, ἄλλο δέ τι τὸ Β, τὸ F). And if (A is) less (than C then D will also be) less
Α ἄρα πρὸς τὸ Β μείζονα λόγον ἔχει ἤπερ τὸ Γ πρὸς τὸ Β. (than F).
ἀλλ᾿ ὡς μὲν τὸ Α πρὸς τὸ Β, οὕτως τὸ Ε πρὸς τὸ Ζ, ὡς For since A is greater than C, and B some other (magδὲ τὸ Γ πρὸς τὸ Β, ἀνάπαλιν οὕτως τὸ Ε πρὸς τὸ Δ. καὶ nitude), A thus has a greater ratio to B than C (has) to
τὸ Ε ἄρα πρὸς τὸ Ζ μείζονα λόγον ἔχει ἤπερ τὸ Ε πρὸς τὸ B [Prop. 5.8]. But as A (is) to B, so E (is) to F. And,
Δ. πρὸς ὃ δὲ τὸ αὐτὸ μείζονα λόγον ἔχει, ἐκεῖνο ἔλασσόν inversely, as C (is) to B, so E (is) to D [Prop. 5.7 corr.].
ἐστιν· ἔλασσον ἄρα ἐστὶ τὸ Ζ τοῦ Δ· μεῖζον ἄρα ἐστὶ τὸ Δ Thus, E also has a greater ratio to F than E (has) to D
τοῦ Ζ. ὁμοίως δὴ δείξομεν, ὅτι κἂν ἴσον ᾖ τὸ Α τῷ Γ, ἴσον [Prop. 5.13]. And that (magnitude) to which the same
ἔσται καὶ τὸ Δ τῷ Ζ, κἂν ἔλαττον, ἔλαττον. (magnitude) has a greater ratio is (the) lesser (magni-
᾿Εὰν ἄρα ᾖ τρία μεγέθη καὶ ἄλλα αὐτοῖς ἴσα τὸ πλῆθος, tude) [Prop. 5.10]. Thus, F is less than D. Thus, D is
σύνδυο λαμβανόμενα καὶ ἐν τῷ αὐτῷ λόγῳ, ᾖ δὲ τετα- greater than F. Similarly, we can show that even if A is
ραγμένη αὐτῶν ἡ ἀναλογία, δι᾿ ἴσου δὲ τὸ πρῶτον τοῦ τρίτου equal to C then D will also be equal to F, and even if (A
μεῖζον ᾖ, καὶ τὸ τέταρτον τοῦ ἕκτου μεῖζον ἔσται, κἂν ἴσον, is) less (than C then D will also be) less (than F).
150
STOIQEIWN eþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 5
ἴσον, κἂν ἔλαττον, ἔλαττον· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. Thus, if there are three magnitudes, and others of
equal number to them, (being) also in the same ratio
taken two by two, and (if) their proportion (is) perturbed, and (if), via equality, the first is greater than the
third then the fourth will also be greater than the sixth.
And if (the first is) equal (to the third then the fourth
will also be) equal (to the sixth). And if (the first is) less
(than the third then the fourth will also be) less (than the
sixth). (Which is) the very thing it was required to show.
†
In modern notation, this proposition reads that if α : β :: ǫ : ζ and β : γ :: δ : ǫ then α T γ as δ T ζ.
kbþ. Proposition 22†
᾿Εὰν ᾖ ὁποσαοῦν μεγέθη καὶ ἄλλα αὐτοῖς ἴσα τὸ πλῆθος, If there are any number of magnitudes whatsoever,
σύνδυο λαμβανόμενα καὶ ἐν τῷ αὐτῷ λόγῳ, καὶ δι᾿ ἴσου ἐν and (some) other (magnitudes) of equal number to them,
τῷ αὐτῷ λόγῳ ἔσται. (which are) also in the same ratio taken two by two, then
they will also be in the same ratio via equality.
Ν
Ζ
Α Γ
∆
Η
Θ
Β
Ε
Κ
Λ
Μ M
A
D
G
H
B
E
K
L
C
F
N
῎Εστω ὁποσαοῦν μεγέθη τὰ Α, Β, Γ καὶ ἄλλα αὐτοῖς ἴσα Let there be any number of magnitudes whatsoever,
τὸ πλῆθος τὰ Δ, Ε, Ζ, σύνδυο λαμβανόμενα ἐν τῷ αὐτῷ A, B, C, and (some) other (magnitudes), D, E, F, of
λόγῳ, ὡς μὲν τὸ Α πρὸς τὸ Β, οὕτως τὸ Δ πρὸς τὸ Ε, ὡς equal number to them, (which are) in the same ratio
δὲ τὸ Β πρὸς τὸ Γ, οὕτως τὸ Ε πρὸς τὸ Ζ· λέγω, ὅτι καὶ taken two by two, (so that) as A (is) to B, so D (is) to
δι᾿ ἴσου ἐν τῷ αὐτῳ λόγῳ ἔσται. E, and as B (is) to C, so E (is) to F. I say that they will
Εἰλήφθω γὰρ τῶν μὲν Α, Δ ἰσάκις πολλαπλάσια τὰ Η, also be in the same ratio via equality. (That is, as A is to
Θ, τῶν δὲ Β, Ε ἄλλα, ἃ ἔτυχεν, ἰσάκις πολλαπλάσια τὰ Κ, C, so D is to F.)
Λ, καὶ ἔτι τῶν Γ, Ζ ἄλλα, ἃ ἔτυχεν, ἰσάκις πολλαπλάσια τὰ For let the equal multiples G and H have been taken
Μ, Ν. of A and D (respectively), and the other random equal
Καὶ ἐπεί ἐστιν ὡς τὸ Α πρὸς τὸ Β, οὕτως τὸ Δ πρὸς τὸ multiples K and L of B and E (respectively), and the
Ε, καὶ εἴληπται τῶν μὲν Α, Δ ἰσάκις πολλαπλάσια τὰ Η, Θ, yet other random equal multiples M and N of C and F
τῶν δὲ Β, Ε ἄλλα, ἃ ἔτυχεν, ἰσάκις πολλαπλάσια τὰ Κ, Λ, (respectively).
ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς τὸ Η πρὸς τὸ Κ, οὕτως τὸ Θ πρὸς τὸ Λ. δὶα And since as A is to B, so D (is) to E, and the equal
τὰ αὐτὰ δὴ καὶ ὡς τὸ Κ πρὸς τὸ Μ, οὕτως τὸ Λ πρὸς τὸ multiples G and H have been taken of A and D (respecΝ. ἐπεὶ οὖν τρία μεγέθη ἐστὶ τὰ Η, Κ, Μ, καὶ ἄλλα αὐτοῖς tively), and the other random equal multiples K and L
ἴσα τὸ πλῆθος τὰ Θ, Λ, Ν, σύνδυο λαμβανόμενα καὶ ἐν τῷ of B and E (respectively), thus as G is to K, so H (is) to
αὐτῷ λόγῳ, δι᾿ ἴσου ἄρα, εἰ ὑπερέχει τὸ Η τοῦ Μ, ὑπερέχει L [Prop. 5.4]. And, so, for the same (reasons), as K (is)
καὶ τὸ Θ τοῦ Ν, καὶ εἰ ἴσον, ἴσον, καὶ εἰ ἔλαττον, ἔλαττον. to M, so L (is) to N. Therefore, since G, K, and M are
καί ἐστι τὰ μὲν Η, Θ τῶν Α, Δ ἰσάκις πολλαπλάσια, τὰ δὲ three magnitudes, and H, L, and N other (magnitudes)
Μ, Ν τῶν Γ, Ζ ἄλλα, ἃ ἔτυχεν, ἰσάκις πολλαπλάσια. ἔστιν of equal number to them, (which are) also in the same
ἄρα ὡς τὸ Α πρὸς τὸ Γ, οὕτως τὸ Δ πρὸς τὸ Ζ. ratio taken two by two, thus, via equality, if G exceeds M
᾿Εὰν ἄρα ᾖ ὁποσαοῦν μεγέθη καὶ ἄλλα αὐτοῖς ἴσα τὸ then H also exceeds N, and if (G is) equal (to M then H
πλῆθος, σύνδυο λαμβανόμενα ἐν τῷ αὐτῷ λόγῳ, καὶ δι᾿ ἴσου is also) equal (to N), and if (G is) less (than M then H is
ἐν τῷ αὐτῷ λόγῳ ἔσται· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. also) less (than N) [Prop. 5.20]. And G and H are equal
multiples of A and D (respectively), and M and N other
random equal multiples of C and F (respectively). Thus,
as A is to C, so D (is) to F [Def. 5.5].
Thus, if there are any number of magnitudes whatsoever, and (some) other (magnitudes) of equal number
to them, (which are) also in the same ratio taken two by
151
STOIQEIWN eþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 5
two, then they will also be in the same ratio via equality.
(Which is) the very thing it was required to show.
†
In modern notation, this proposition reads that if α : β :: ǫ : ζ and β : γ :: ζ : η and γ : δ :: η : θ then α : δ :: ǫ : θ.
kgþ. Proposition 23†
᾿Εὰν ᾖ τρία μεγέθη καὶ ἄλλα αὐτοῖς ἴσα τὸ πλῆθος If there are three magnitudes, and others of equal
σύνδυο λαμβανόμενα ἐν τῷ αὐτῷ λόγῳ, ᾖ δὲ τεταραγμένη number to them, (being) in the same ratio taken two by
αὐτῶν ἡ ἀναλογία, καὶ δι᾿ ἴσου ἐν τῷ αὐτῷ λόγῳ ἔσται. two, and (if) their proportion is perturbed, then they will
also be in the same ratio via equality.
Ν
Α
∆
Η
Κ
Β
Ε
Θ
Μ
Γ
Ζ
Λ
M
A
D
G
K
B
E
H
C
F
L
N
῎Εστω τρία μεγέθη τὰ Α, Β, Γ καὶ ἄλλα αὐτοῖς ἴσα τὸ Let A, B, and C be three magnitudes, and D, E and F
πλῆθος σύνδυο λαμβανόμενα ἐν τῷ αὐτῷ λόγῳ τὰ Δ, Ε, Ζ, other (magnitudes) of equal number to them, (being) in
ἔστω δὲ τεταραγμένη αὐτῶν ἡ ἀναλογία, ὡς μὲν τὸ Α πρὸς the same ratio taken two by two. And let their proportion
τὸ Β, οὕτως τὸ Ε πρὸς τὸ Ζ, ὡς δὲ τὸ Β πρὸς τὸ Γ, οὕτως be perturbed, (so that) as A (is) to B, so E (is) to F, and
τὸ Δ πρὸς τὸ Ε· λέγω, ὅτι ἐστὶν ὡς τὸ Α πρὸς τὸ Γ, οὕτως as B (is) to C, so D (is) to E. I say that as A is to C, so
τὸ Δ πρὸς τὸ Ζ. D (is) to F.
Εἰλήφθω τῶν μὲν Α, Β, Δ ἰσάκις πολλαπλάσια τὰ Η, Θ, Let the equal multiples G, H, and K have been taken
Κ, τῶν δὲ Γ, Ε, Ζ ἄλλα, ἃ ἔτυχεν, ἰσάκις πολλαπλάσια τὰ of A, B, and D (respectively), and the other random
Λ, Μ, Ν. equal multiples L, M, and N of C, E, and F (respecΚαὶ ἐπεὶ ἰσάκις ἐστὶ πολλαπλάσια τὰ Η, Θ τῶν Α, Β, τὰ tively).
δὲ μέρη τοὶς ὡσαύτως πολλαπλασίοις τὸν αὐτὸν ἔχει λόγον, And since G and H are equal multiples of A and B
ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς τὸ Α πρὸς τὸ Β, οὕτως τὸ Η πρὸς τὸ Θ. διὰ (respectively), and parts have the same ratio as similar
τὰ αὐτὰ δὴ καὶ ὡς τὸ Ε πρὸς τὸ Ζ, οὕτως τὸ Μ πρὸς τὸ Ν· multiples [Prop. 5.15], thus as A (is) to B, so G (is) to
καί ἐστιν ὡς τὸ Α πρὸς τὸ Β, οὕτως τὸ Ε πρὸς τὸ Ζ· καὶ ὡς H. And, so, for the same (reasons), as E (is) to F, so M
ἄρα τὸ Η πρὸς τὸ Θ, οὕτως τὸ Μ πρὸς τὸ Ν. καὶ ἐπεί ἐστιν (is) to N. And as A is to B, so E (is) to F. And, thus, as
ὡς τὸ Β πρὸς τὸ Γ, οὕτως τὸ Δ πρὸς τὸ Ε, καὶ ἐναλλὰξ G (is) to H, so M (is) to N [Prop. 5.11]. And since as B
ὡς τὸ Β πρὸς τὸ Δ, οὕτως τὸ Γ πρὸς τὸ Ε. καὶ ἐπεὶ τὰ is to C, so D (is) to E, also, alternately, as B (is) to D, so
Θ, Κ τῶν Β, Δ ἰσάκις ἐστὶ πολλαπλάσια, τὰ δὲ μέρη τοῖς C (is) to E [Prop. 5.16]. And since H and K are equal
ἰσάκις πολλαπλασίοις τὸν αὐτὸν ἔχει λόγον, ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς multiples of B and D (respectively), and parts have the
τὸ Β πρὸς τὸ Δ, οὕτως τὸ Θ πρὸς τὸ Κ. ἀλλ᾿ ὡς τὸ Β πρὸς same ratio as similar multiples [Prop. 5.15], thus as B is
τὸ Δ, οὕτως τὸ Γ πρὸς τὸ Ε· καὶ ὡς ἄρα τὸ Θ πρὸς τὸ Κ, to D, so H (is) to K. But, as B (is) to D, so C (is) to
οὕτως τὸ Γ πρὸς τὸ Ε. πάλιν, ἐπεὶ τὰ Λ, Μ τῶν Γ, Ε ἰσάκις E. And, thus, as H (is) to K, so C (is) to E [Prop. 5.11].
ἐστι πολλαπλάσια, ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς τὸ Γ πρὸς τὸ Ε, οὕτως τὸ Again, since L and M are equal multiples of C and E (reΛ πρὸς τὸ Μ. ἀλλ᾿ ὡς τὸ Γ πρὸς τὸ Ε, οὕτως τὸ Θ πρὸς spectively), thus as C is to E, so L (is) to M [Prop. 5.15].
τὸ Κ· καὶ ὡς ἄρα τὸ Θ πρὸς τὸ Κ, οὕτως τὸ Λ πρὸς τὸ Μ, But, as C (is) to E, so H (is) to K. And, thus, as H (is)
καὶ ἐναλλὰξ ὡς τὸ Θ πρὸς τὸ Λ, τὸ Κ πρὸς τὸ Μ. ἐδείχθη to K, so L (is) to M [Prop. 5.11]. Also, alternately, as H
δὲ καὶ ὡς τὸ Η πρὸς τὸ Θ, οὕτως τὸ Μ πρὸς τὸ Ν. ἐπεὶ (is) to L, so K (is) to M [Prop. 5.16]. And it was also
οὖν τρία μεγέθη ἐστὶ τὰ Η, Θ, Λ, καὶ ἄλλα αὐτοις ἴσα τὸ shown (that) as G (is) to H, so M (is) to N. Therefore,
πλῆθος τὰ Κ, Μ, Ν σύνδυο λαμβανόμενα ἐν τῷ αὐτῷ λόγῳ, since G, H, and L are three magnitudes, and K, M, and
καί ἐστιν αὐτῶν τεταραγμένη ἡ ἀναλογία, δι᾿ ἴσου ἄρα, εἰ N other (magnitudes) of equal number to them, (being)
ὑπερέχει τὸ Η τοῦ Λ, ὑπερέχει καὶ τὸ Κ τοῦ Ν, καὶ εἰ ἴσον, in the same ratio taken two by two, and their proportion
ἴσον, καὶ εἰ ἔλαττον, ἔλαττον. καί ἐστι τὰ μὲν Η, Κ τῶν Α, is perturbed, thus, via equality, if G exceeds L then K
Δ ἰσάκις πολλαπλάσια, τὰ δὲ Λ, Ν τῶν Γ, Ζ. ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς also exceeds N, and if (G is) equal (to L then K is also)
τὸ Α πρὸς τὸ Γ, οὕτως τὸ Δ πρὸς τὸ Ζ. equal (to N), and if (G is) less (than L then K is also)
᾿Εὰν ἄρα ᾖ τρία μεγέθη καὶ ἄλλα αὐτοῖς ἴσα τὸ πλῆθος less (than N) [Prop. 5.21]. And G and K are equal mulσύνδυο λαμβανόμενα ἐν τῷ αὐτῷ λόγῳ, ᾖ δὲ τεταραγμένη tiples of A and D (respectively), and L and N of C and
152
STOIQEIWN eþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 5
αὐτῶν ἡ ἀναλογία, καὶ δι᾿ ἴσου ἐν τῷ αὐτῷ λόγῳ ἔσται· ὅπερ F (respectively). Thus, as A (is) to C, so D (is) to F
ἔδει δεῖξαι. [Def. 5.5].
Thus, if there are three magnitudes, and others of
equal number to them, (being) in the same ratio taken
two by two, and (if) their proportion is perturbed, then
they will also be in the same ratio via equality. (Which is)
the very thing it was required to show.
†
In modern notation, this proposition reads that if α : β :: ǫ : ζ and β : γ :: δ : ǫ then α : γ :: δ : ζ.
kdþ. Proposition 24†
᾿Εὰν πρῶτον πρὸς δεύτερον τὸν αὐτὸν ἔχῃ λόγον καὶ If a first (magnitude) has to a second the same ratio
τρίτον πρὸς τέταρτον, ἔχῃ δὲ καὶ πέμπτον πρὸς δεύτερον that third (has) to a fourth, and a fifth (magnitude) also
τὸν αὐτὸν λόγον καὶ ἕκτον πρὸς τέταρτον, καὶ συντεθὲν has to the second the same ratio that a sixth (has) to the
πρῶτον καὶ πέμπτον πρὸς δεύτερον τὸν αὐτὸν ἕξει λόγον fourth, then the first (magnitude) and the fifth, added
καὶ τρίτον καὶ ἕκτον πρὸς τέταρτον. together, will also have the same ratio to the second that
the third (magnitude) and sixth (added together, have)
to the fourth.
Β
Γ
∆ Θ
Ζ
Α Η
Ε E
C
D H
F
A G
B
Πρῶτον γὰρ τὸ ΑΒ πρὸς δεύρερον τὸ Γ τὸν αὐτὸν ἐχέτω For let a first (magnitude) AB have the same ratio to
λόγον καὶ τρίτον τὸ ΔΕ πρὸς τέταρτον τὸ Ζ, ἐχέτω δὲ καὶ a second C that a third DE (has) to a fourth F. And let
πέμπτον τὸ ΒΗ πρὸς δεύτερον τὸ Γ τὸν αὐτὸν λόγον καὶ a fifth (magnitude) BG also have the same ratio to the
ἕκτον τὸ ΕΘ πρὸς τέταρτον τὸ Ζ· λέγω, ὅτι καὶ συντεθὲν second C that a sixth EH (has) to the fourth F. I say
πρῶτον καὶ πέμπτον τὸ ΑΗ πρὸς δεύτερον τὸ Γ τὸν αὐτὸν that the first (magnitude) and the fifth, added together,
ἕξει λόγον, καὶ τρίτον καὶ ἕκτον τὸ ΔΘ πρὸς τέταρτον τὸ AG, will also have the same ratio to the second C that the
Ζ. third (magnitude) and the sixth, (added together), DH,
᾿Επεὶ γάρ ἐστιν ὡς τὸ ΒΗ πρὸς τὸ Γ, οὕτως τὸ ΕΘ πρὸς (has) to the fourth F.
τὸ Ζ, ἀνάπαλιν ἄρα ὡς τὸ Γ πρὸς τὸ ΒΗ, οὕτως τὸ Ζ πρὸς For since as BG is to C, so EH (is) to F, thus, inτὸ ΕΘ. ἐπεὶ οὖν ἐστιν ὡς τὸ ΑΒ πρὸς τὸ Γ, οὕτως τὸ ΔΕ versely, as C (is) to BG, so F (is) to EH [Prop. 5.7 corr.].
πρὸς τὸ Ζ, ὡς δὲ τὸ Γ πρὸς τὸ ΒΗ, οὕτως τὸ Ζ πρὸς τὸ Therefore, since as AB is to C, so DE (is) to F, and as C
ΕΘ, δι᾿ ἴσου ἄρα ἐστὶν ὡς τὸ ΑΒ πρὸς τὸ ΒΗ, οὕτως τὸ ΔΕ (is) to BG, so F (is) to EH, thus, via equality, as AB is to
πρὸς τὸ ΕΘ. καὶ ἐπεὶ διῃρημένα μεγέθη ἀνάλογόν ἐστιν, καὶ BG, so DE (is) to EH [Prop. 5.22]. And since separated
συντεθέντα ἀνάλογον ἔσται· ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς τὸ ΑΗ πρὸς τὸ magnitudes are proportional then they will also be proΗΒ, οὕτως τὸ ΔΘ πρὸς τὸ ΘΕ. ἔστι δὲ καὶ ὡς τὸ ΒΗ πρὸς portional (when) composed [Prop. 5.18]. Thus, as AG is
τὸ Γ, οὕτως τὸ ΕΘ πρὸς τὸ Ζ· δι᾿ ἴσου ἄρα ἐστὶν ὡς τὸ ΑΗ to GB, so DH (is) to HE. And, also, as BG is to C, so
πρὸς τὸ Γ, οὕτως τὸ ΔΘ πρὸς τὸ Ζ. EH (is) to F. Thus, via equality, as AG is to C, so DH
᾿Εὰν ἄρα πρῶτον πρὸς δεύτερον τὸν αὐτὸν ἔχῃ λόγον (is) to F [Prop. 5.22].
καὶ τρίτον πρὸς τέταρτον, ἔχῃ δὲ καὶ πέμπτον πρὸς δεύτερον Thus, if a first (magnitude) has to a second the same
τὸν αὐτὸν λόγον καὶ ἕκτον πρὸς τέταρτον, καὶ συντεθὲν ratio that a third (has) to a fourth, and a fifth (magniπρῶτον καὶ πέμπτον πρὸς δεύτερον τὸν αὐτὸν ἕξει λόγον tude) also has to the second the same ratio that a sixth
καὶ τρίτον καὶ ἕκτον πρὸς τέταρτον· ὅπερ ἔδει δεὶξαι. (has) to the fourth, then the first (magnitude) and the
fifth, added together, will also have the same ratio to the
second that the third (magnitude) and the sixth (added
153
STOIQEIWN eþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 5
together, have) to the fourth. (Which is) the very thing it
was required to show.
†
In modern notation, this proposition reads that if α : β :: γ : δ and ǫ : β :: ζ : δ then α + ǫ : β :: γ + ζ : δ.
keþ. Proposition 25†
᾿Εὰν τέσσαρα μεγέθη ἀνάλογον ᾖ, τὸ μέγιστον [αὐτῶν] If four magnitudes are proportional then the (sum of
καὶ τὸ ἐλάχιστον δύο τῶν λοιπῶν μείζονά ἐστιν. the) largest and the smallest [of them] is greater than the
(sum of the) remaining two (magnitudes).
Ζ
Η
Θ
Γ
Ε
Α Β
∆
F
G
E
H
C D
A B
῎Εστω τέσσαρα μεγέθη ἀνάλογον τὰ ΑΒ, ΓΔ, Ε, Ζ, ὡς Let AB, CD, E, and F be four proportional magniτὸ ΑΒ πρὸς τὸ ΓΔ, οὕτως τὸ Ε πρὸς τὸ Ζ, ἔστω δὲ μέγιστον tudes, (such that) as AB (is) to CD, so E (is) to F. And
μὲν αὐτῶν τὸ ΑΒ, ἐλάχιστον δὲ τὸ Ζ· λέγω, ὅτι τὰ ΑΒ, Ζ let AB be the greatest of them, and F the least. I say that
τῶν ΓΔ, Ε μείζονά ἐστιν. AB and F is greater than CD and E.
Κείσθω γὰρ τῷ μὲν Ε ἴσον τὸ ΑΗ, τῷ δὲ Ζ ἴσον τὸ ΓΘ. For let AG be made equal to E, and CH equal to F.
᾿Επεὶ [οὖν] ἐστιν ὡς τὸ ΑΒ πρὸς τὸ ΓΔ, οὕτως τὸ Ε [In fact,] since as AB is to CD, so E (is) to F, and
πρὸς τὸ Ζ, ἴσον δὲ τὸ μὲν Ε τῷ ΑΗ, τὸ δὲ Ζ τῷ ΓΘ, ἔστιν E (is) equal to AG, and F to CH, thus as AB is to CD,
ἄρα ὡς τὸ ΑΒ πρὸς τὸ ΓΔ, οὕτως τὸ ΑΗ πρὸς τὸ ΓΘ. so AG (is) to CH. And since the whole AB is to the
καὶ ἐπεί ἐστιν ὡς ὅλον τὸ ΑΒ πρὸς ὅλον τὸ ΓΔ, οὕτως whole CD as the (part) taken away AG (is) to the (part)
ἀφαιρεθὲν τὸ ΑΗ πρὸς ἀφαιρεθὲν τὸ ΓΘ, καὶ λοιπὸν ἄρα taken away CH, thus the remainder GB will also be to
τὸ ΗΒ πρὸς λοιπὸν τὸ ΘΔ ἔσται ὡς ὅλον τὸ ΑΒ πρὸς ὅλον the remainder HD as the whole AB (is) to the whole CD
τὸ ΓΔ. μεῖζον δὲ τὸ ΑΒ τοῦ ΓΔ· μεῖζον ἄρα καὶ τὸ ΗΒ τοῦ [Prop. 5.19]. And AB (is) greater than CD. Thus, GB
ΘΔ. καὶ ἐπεὶ ἴσον ἐστὶ τὸ μὲν ΑΗ τῷ Ε, τὸ δὲ ΓΘ τῷ Ζ, (is) also greater than HD. And since AG is equal to E,
τὰ ἄρα ΑΗ, Ζ ἴσα ἐστὶ τοῖς ΓΘ, Ε. καὶ [ἐπεὶ] ἐὰν [ἀνίσοις and CH to F, thus AG and F is equal to CH and E.
ἴσα προστεθῇ, τὰ ὅλα ἄνισά ἐστιν, ἐὰν ἄρα] τῶν ΗΒ, ΘΔ And [since] if [equal (magnitudes) are added to unequal
ἀνίσων ὄντων καὶ μείζονος τοῦ ΗΒ τῷ μὲν ΗΒ προστεθῇ (magnitudes) then the wholes are unequal, thus if] AG
τὰ ΑΗ, Ζ, τῷ δὲ ΘΔ προστεθῇ τὰ ΓΘ, Ε, συνάγεται τὰ and F are added to GB, and CH and E to HD—GB
ΑΒ, Ζ μείζονα τῶν ΓΔ, Ε. and HD being unequal, and GB greater—it is inferred
᾿Εὰν ἄρα τέσσαρα μεγέθη ἀνάλογον ᾖ, τὸ μέγιστον that AB and F (is) greater than CD and E.
αὐτῶν καὶ τὸ ἐλάχιστον δύο τῶν λοιπῶν μείζονά ἐστιν. ὅπερ Thus, if four magnitudes are proportional then the
ἔδει δεῖξαι. (sum of the) largest and the smallest of them is greater
than the (sum of the) remaining two (magnitudes).
(Which is) the very thing it was required to show.
†
In modern notation, this proposition reads that if α : β :: γ : δ, and α is the greatest and δ the least, then α + δ > β + γ.
154
ELEMENTS BOOK 6
Similar Figures
155
STOIQEIWN þ. ELEMENTS BOOK 6
VOroi. Definitions
αʹ. ῞Ομοια σχήματα εὐθύγραμμά ἐστιν, ὅσα τάς τε 1. Similar rectilinear figures are those (which) have
γωνίας ἴσας ἔχει κατὰ μίαν καὶ τὰς περὶ τὰς ἴσας γωνίας (their) angles separately equal and the (corresponding)
πλευρὰς ἀνάλογον. sides about the equal angles proportional.
βʹ. ῎Ακρον καὶ μέσον λόγον εὐθεῖα τετμῆσθαι λέγεται, 2. A straight-line is said to have been cut in extreme
ὅταν ᾖ ὡς ἡ ὅλη πρὸς τὸ μεῖζον τμῆμα, οὕτως τὸ μεῖζον and mean ratio when as the whole is to the greater segπρὸς τὸ ἔλαττὸν. ment so the greater (segment is) to the lesser.
γʹ. ῞Υψος ἐστὶ πάντος σχήματος ἡ ἀπὸ τῆς κορυφῆς ἐπὶ 3. The height of any figure is the (straight-line) drawn
τὴν βάσιν κάθετος ἀγομένη. from the vertex perpendicular to the base.
aþ. Proposition 1†
Τὰ τρίγωνα καὶ τὰ παραλληλόγραμμα τὰ ὑπὸ τὸ αὐτὸ Triangles and parallelograms which are of the same
ὕψος ὄντα πρὸς ἄλληλά ἐστιν ὡς αἱ βάσεις. height are to one another as their bases.
Ζ
Θ Λ Κ
Ε
Η Β Γ ∆
Α F
H K L
E
G B C D
A
῎Εστω τρίγωνα μὲν τὰ ΑΒΓ, ΑΓΔ, παραλληλόγραμμα Let ABC and ACD be triangles, and EC and CF parδὲ τὰ ΕΓ, ΓΖ ὑπὸ τὸ αὐτὸ ὕψος τὸ ΑΓ· λέγω, ὅτι ἐστὶν ὡς allelograms, of the same height AC. I say that as base BC
ἡ ΒΓ βάσις πρὸς τὴν ΓΔ βάσις, οὕτως τὸ ΑΒΓ τρίγωνον is to base CD, so triangle ABC (is) to triangle ACD, and
πρὸς τὸ ΑΓΔ τρίγωνον, καὶ τὸ ΕΓ παραλληλόγραμμον πρὸς parallelogram EC to parallelogram CF.
τὸ ΓΖ παραλληλόγραμμον. For let the (straight-line) BD have been produced in
᾿Εκβεβλήσθω γὰρ ἡ ΒΔ ἐφ᾿ ἑκάτερα τὰ μέρη ἐπὶ τὰ Θ, Λ each direction to points H and L, and let [any number]
σημεῖα, καὶ κείσθωσαν τῇ μὲν ΒΓ βάσει ἴσαι [ὁσαιδηποτοῦν] (of straight-lines) BG and GH be made equal to base
αἱ ΒΗ, ΗΘ, τῇ δὲ ΓΔ βάσει ἴσαι ὁσαιδηποτοῦν αἱ ΔΚ, ΚΛ, BC, and any number (of straight-lines) DK and KL
καὶ ἐπεζεύχθωσαν αἱ ΑΗ, ΑΘ, ΑΚ, ΑΛ. equal to base CD. And let AG, AH, AK, and AL have
Καὶ ἐπεὶ ἴσαι εἰσὶν αἱ ΓΒ, ΒΗ, ΗΘ ἀλλήλαις, ἴσα ἐστὶ καὶ been joined.
τὰ ΑΘΗ, ΑΗΒ, ΑΒΓ τρίγωνα ἀλλήλοις. ὁσαπλασίων ἄρα And since CB, BG, and GH are equal to one another,
ἐστὶν ἡ ΘΓ βάσις τῆς ΒΓ βάσεως, τοσαυταπλάσιόν ἐστι triangles AHG, AGB, and ABC are also equal to one
καὶ τὸ ΑΘΓ τρίγωνον τοῦ ΑΒΓ τριγώνου. διὰ τὰ αὐτὰ another [Prop. 1.38]. Thus, as many times as base HC
δὴ ὁσαπλασίων ἐστὶν ἡ ΛΓ βάσις τῆς ΓΔ βάσεως, τοσαυ- is (divisible by) base BC, so many times is triangle AHC
ταπλάσιόν ἐστι καὶ τὸ ΑΛΓ τρίγωνον τοῦ ΑΓΔ τριγώνου· also (divisible) by triangle ABC. So, for the same (reaκαὶ εἰ ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ΘΓ βάσις τῇ ΓΛ βάσει, ἴσον ἐστὶ καὶ τὸ sons), as many times as base LC is (divisible) by base
ΑΘΓ τρίγωνον τῳ ΑΓΛ τριγώνῳ, καὶ εἰ ὑπερέχει ἡ ΘΓ βάσις CD, so many times is triangle ALC also (divisible) by
τῆς ΓΛ βάσεως, ὑπερέχει καὶ τὸ ΑΘΓ τρίγωνον τοῦ ΑΓΛ triangle ACD. And if base HC is equal to base CL then
τριγώνου, καὶ εἰ ἐλάσσων, ἔλασσον. τεσσάρων δὴ ὄντων triangle AHC is also equal to triangle ACL [Prop. 1.38].
μεγεθῶν δύο μὲν βάσεων τῶν ΒΓ, ΓΔ, δύο δὲ τριγώνων And if base HC exceeds base CL then triangle AHC
τῶν ΑΒΓ, ΑΓΔ εἴληπται ἰσάκις πολλαπλάσια τῆς μὲν ΒΓ also exceeds triangle ACL.
‡ And if (HC is) less (than
βάσεως καὶ τοῦ ΑΒΓ τριγώνου ἥ τε ΘΓ βάσις καὶ τὸ ΑΘΓ CL then AHC is also) less (than ACL). So, their being
τρίγωνον, τῆς δὲ ΓΔ βάσεως καὶ τοῦ ΑΔΓ τριγώνου ἄλλα, four magnitudes, two bases, BC and CD, and two trian156
STOIQEIWN þ. ELEMENTS BOOK 6
ἃ ἔτυχεν, ἰσάκις πολλαπλάσια ἥ τε ΛΓ βάσις καὶ τὸ ΑΛΓ gles, ABC and ACD, equal multiples have been taken of
τρίγωνον· καὶ δέδεικται, ὅτι, εἰ ὑπερέχει ἡ ΘΓ βάσις τῆς ΓΛ base BC and triangle ABC—(namely), base HC and triβάσεως, ὑπερέχει καὶ τὸ ΑΘΓ τρίγωνον τοῦ ΑΛΓ τριγώνου, angle AHC—and other random equal multiples of base
καί εἰ ἴση, ἴσον, καὶ εἰ ἔλασσων, ἔλασσον· ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς ἡ CD and triangle ADC—(namely), base LC and triangle
ΒΓ βάσις πρὸς τὴν ΓΔ βάσιν, οὕτως τὸ ΑΒΓ τρίγωνον πρὸς ALC. And it has been shown that if base HC exceeds
τὸ ΑΓΔ τρίγωνον. base CL then triangle AHC also exceeds triangle ALC,
Καὶ ἐπεὶ τοῦ μὲν ΑΒΓ τριγώνου διπλάσιόν ἐστι τὸ ΕΓ and if (HC is) equal (to CL then AHC is also) equal (to
παραλληλόγραμμον, τοῦ δὲ ΑΓΔ τριγώνου διπλάσιόν ἐστι ALC), and if (HC is) less (than CL then AHC is also)
τὸ ΖΓ παραλληλόγραμμον, τὰ δὲ μέρη τοῖς ὡσαύτως πολ- less (than ALC). Thus, as base BC is to base CD, so
λαπλασίοις τὸν αὐτὸν ἔχει λόγον, ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς τὸ ΑΒΓ triangle ABC (is) to triangle ACD [Def. 5.5]. And since
τρίγωνον πρὸς τὸ ΑΓΔ τρίγωνον, οὕτως τὸ ΕΓ παραλ- parallelogram EC is double triangle ABC, and paralleloληλόγραμμον πρὸς τὸ ΖΓ παραλληλόγραμμον. ἐπεὶ οὖν gram FC is double triangle ACD [Prop. 1.34], and parts
ἐδείχθη, ὡς μὲν ἡ ΒΓ βάσις πρὸς τὴν ΓΔ, οὕτως τὸ ΑΒΓ have the same ratio as similar multiples [Prop. 5.15], thus
τρίγωνον πρὸς τὸ ΑΓΔ τρίγωνον, ὡς δὲ τὸ ΑΒΓ τρίγωνον as triangle ABC is to triangle ACD, so parallelogram EC
πρὸς τὸ ΑΓΔ τρίγωνον, οὕτως τὸ ΕΓ παραλληλόγραμμον (is) to parallelogram FC. In fact, since it was shown that
πρὸς τὸ ΓΖ παραλληλόγραμμον, καὶ ὡς ἄρα ἡ ΒΓ βάσις πρὸς as base BC (is) to CD, so triangle ABC (is) to triangle
τὴν ΓΔ βάσιν, οὕτως τὸ ΕΓ παραλληλόγραμμον πρὸς τὸ ΖΓ ACD, and as triangle ABC (is) to triangle ACD, so parπαραλληλόγραμμον. allelogram EC (is) to parallelogram CF, thus, also, as
Τὰ ἄρα τρίγωνα καὶ τὰ παραλληλόγραμμα τὰ ὑπὸ τὸ base BC (is) to base CD, so parallelogram EC (is) to
αὐτὸ ὕψος ὄντα πρὸς ἄλληλά ἐστιν ὡς αἱ βάσεις· ὅπερ ἔδει parallelogram FC [Prop. 5.11].
δεῖξαι. Thus, triangles and parallelograms which are of the
same height are to one another as their bases. (Which is)
the very thing it was required to show.
† As is easily demonstrated, this proposition holds even when the triangles, or parallelograms, do not share a common side, and/or are not
right-angled.
‡ This is a straight-forward generalization of Prop. 1.38.
bþ. Proposition 2
᾿Εὰν τριγώνου παρὰ μίαν τῶν πλευρῶν ἀχθῇ τις εὐθεῖα, If some straight-line is drawn parallel to one of the
ἀνάλογον τεμεῖ τὰς τοῦ τριγώνου πλευράς· καὶ ἐὰν αἱ τοῦ sides of a triangle then it will cut the (other) sides of the
τριγώνου πλευραὶ ἀνάλογον τμηθῶσιν, ἡ ἐπὶ τὰς τομὰς ἐπι- triangle proportionally. And if (two of) the sides of a triζευγνυμένη εὐθεῖα παρὰ τὴν λοιπὴν ἔσται τοῦ τριγώνου angle are cut proportionally then the straight-line joining
πλευράν. the cutting (points) will be parallel to the remaining side
of the triangle.
∆
Γ
Ε
Β
Α A
B C
D E
Τριγώνου γὰρ τοῦ ΑΒΓ παράλληλος μιᾷ τῶν πλευρῶν For let DE have been drawn parallel to one of the
τῇ ΒΓ ἤχθω ἡ ΔΕ· λέγω, ὅτι ἐστὶν ὡς ἡ ΒΔ πρὸς τὴν ΔΑ, sides BC of triangle ABC. I say that as BD is to DA, so
οὕτως ἡ ΓΕ πρὸς τὴν ΕΑ. CE (is) to EA.
157
STOIQEIWN þ. ELEMENTS BOOK 6
᾿Επεζεύχθωσαν γὰρ αἱ ΒΕ, ΓΔ. For let BE and CD have been joined.
῎Ισον ἄρα ἐστὶ τὸ ΒΔΕ τρίγωνον τῷ ΓΔΕ τριγώνῳ· Thus, triangle BDE is equal to triangle CDE. For
ἐπὶ γὰρ τῆς αὐτῆς βάσεώς ἐστι τῆς ΔΕ καὶ ἐν ταῖς αὐταῖς they are on the same base DE and between the same
παραλλήλοις ταῖς ΔΕ, ΒΓ· ἄλλο δέ τι τὸ ΑΔΕ τρίγωνον. τὰ parallels DE and BC [Prop. 1.38]. And ADE is some
δὲ ἴσα πρὸς τὸ αὐτὸ τὸν αὐτὸν ἔχει λόγον· ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς τὸ other triangle. And equal (magnitudes) have the same raΒΔΕ τρίγωνον πρὸς τὸ ΑΔΕ [τρίγωνον], οὕτως τὸ ΓΔΕ tio to the same (magnitude) [Prop. 5.7]. Thus, as triangle
τρίγωνον πρὸς τὸ ΑΔΕ τρίγωνον. αλλ᾿ ὡς μὲν τὸ ΒΔΕ BDE is to [triangle] ADE, so triangle CDE (is) to trianτρίγωνον πρὸς τὸ ΑΔΕ, οὕτως ἡ ΒΔ πρὸς τὴν ΔΑ· ὑπὸ gle ADE. But, as triangle BDE (is) to triangle ADE, so
γὰρ τὸ αὐτὸ ὕψος ὄντα τὴν ἀπὸ τοῦ Ε ἐπὶ τὴν ΑΒ κάθετον (is) BD to DA. For, having the same height—(namely),
ἀγομένην πρὸς ἄλληλά εἰσιν ὡς αἱ βάσεις. διὰ τὰ αὐτὰ δὴ the (straight-line) drawn from E perpendicular to AB—
ὡς τὸ ΓΔΕ τρίγωνον πρὸς τὸ ΑΔΕ, οὕτως ἡ ΓΕ πρὸς τὴν they are to one another as their bases [Prop. 6.1]. So, for
ΕΑ· καὶ ὡς ἄρα ἡ ΒΔ πρὸς τὴν ΔΑ, οὕτως ἡ ΓΕ πρὸς τὴν the same (reasons), as triangle CDE (is) to ADE, so CE
ΕΑ. (is) to EA. And, thus, as BD (is) to DA, so CE (is) to
᾿Αλλὰ δὴ αἱ τοῦ ΑΒΓ τριγώνου πλευραὶ αἱ ΑΒ, ΑΓ EA [Prop. 5.11].
ἀνάλογον τετμήσθωσαν, ὡς ἡ ΒΔ πρὸς τὴν ΔΑ, οὕτως And so, let the sides AB and AC of triangle ABC
ἡ ΓΕ πρὸς τὴν ΕΑ, καὶ ἐπεζεύχθω ἡ ΔΕ· λέγω, ὅτι have been cut proportionally (such that) as BD (is) to
παράλληλός ἐστιν ἡ ΔΕ τῇ ΒΓ. DA, so CE (is) to EA. And let DE have been joined. I
Τῶν γὰρ αὐτῶν κατασκευασθέντων, ἐπεί ἐστιν ὡς ἡ say that DE is parallel to BC.
ΒΔ πρὸς τὴν ΔΑ, οὕτως ἡ ΓΕ πρὸς τὴν ΕΑ, ἀλλ᾿ ὡς For, by the same construction, since as BD is to DA,
μὲν ἡ ΒΔ πρὸς τὴν ΔΑ, οὕτως τὸ ΒΔΕ τρίγωνον πρὸς so CE (is) to EA, but as BD (is) to DA, so triangle BDE
τὸ ΑΔΕ τρίγωνον, ὡς δὲ ἡ ΓΕ πρὸς τὴν ΕΑ, οὕτως τὸ (is) to triangle ADE, and as CE (is) to EA, so triangle
ΓΔΕ τρίγωνον πρὸς τὸ ΑΔΕ τρίγωνον, καὶ ὡς ἄρα τὸ CDE (is) to triangle ADE [Prop. 6.1], thus, also, as triΒΔΕ τρίγωνον πρὸς τὸ ΑΔΕ τρίγωνον, οὕτως τὸ ΓΔΕ angle BDE (is) to triangle ADE, so triangle CDE (is)
τρίγωνον πρὸς τὸ ΑΔΕ τρίγωνον. ἑκάτερον ἄρα τῶν ΒΔΕ, to triangle ADE [Prop. 5.11]. Thus, triangles BDE and
ΓΔΕ τριγώνων πρὸς τὸ ΑΔΕ τὸν αὐτὸν ἔχει λόγον. ἴσον CDE each have the same ratio to ADE. Thus, triangle
ἄρα ἐστὶ τὸ ΒΔΕ τρίγωνον τῷ ΓΔΕ τριγώνῳ· καί εἰσιν ἐπὶ BDE is equal to triangle CDE [Prop. 5.9]. And they are
τῆς αὐτῆς βάσεως τῆς ΔΕ. τὰ δὲ ἴσα τρίγωνα καὶ ἐπὶ τῆς on the same base DE. And equal triangles, which are
αὐτῆς βάσεως ὄντα καὶ ἐν ταῖς αὐταῖς παραλλήλοις ἐστίν. also on the same base, are also between the same paralπαράλληλος ἄρα ἐστὶν ἡ ΔΕ τῇ ΒΓ. lels [Prop. 1.39]. Thus, DE is parallel to BC.
᾿Εὰν ἄρα τριγώνου παρὰ μίαν τῶν πλευρῶν ἀχθῇ τις Thus, if some straight-line is drawn parallel to one of
εὐθεῖα, ἀνάλογον τεμεῖ τὰς τοῦ τριγώνου πλευράς· καὶ ἐὰν the sides of a triangle, then it will cut the (other) sides
αἱ τοῦ τριγώνου πλευραὶ ἀνάλογον τμηθῶσιν, ἡ ἐπὶ τὰς of the triangle proportionally. And if (two of) the sides
τομὰς ἐπιζευγνυμένη εὐθεῖα παρὰ τὴν λοιπὴν ἔσται τοῦ of a triangle are cut proportionally, then the straight-line
τριγώνου πλευράν· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. joining the cutting (points) will be parallel to the remaining side of the triangle. (Which is) the very thing it was
required to show.
gþ. Proposition 3
᾿Εὰν τριγώνου ἡ γωνία δίχα τμηθῇ, ἡ δὲ τέμνουσα τὴν If an angle of a triangle is cut in half, and the straightγωνίαν εὐθεῖα τέμνῃ καὶ τὴν βάσιν, τὰ τῆς βάσεως τμήματα line cutting the angle also cuts the base, then the segτὸν αὐτὸν ἕξει λόγον ταῖς λοιπαῖς τοῦ τριγώνου πλευραῖς· ments of the base will have the same ratio as the remainκαὶ ἐὰν τὰ τῆς βάσεως τμήματα τὸν αὐτὸν ἔχῃ λόγον ταῖς ing sides of the triangle. And if the segments of the base
λοιπαῖς τοῦ τριγώνου πλευραῖς, ἡ ἀπὸ τῆς κορυφῆς ἐπὶ τὴν have the same ratio as the remaining sides of the trianτομὴν ἐπιζευγνυμένη εὐθεῖα δίχα τεμεῖ τὴν τοῦ τριγώνου gle, then the straight-line joining the vertex to the cutting
γωνίαν. (point) will cut the angle of the triangle in half.
῎Εστω τρίγωνον τὸ ΑΒΓ, καὶ τετμήσθω ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΑΓ Let ABC be a triangle. And let the angle BAC have
γωνία δίχα ὑπὸ τῆς ΑΔ εὐθείας· λέγω, ὅτι ἐστὶν ὡς ἡ ΒΔ been cut in half by the straight-line AD. I say that as BD
πρὸς τὴν ΓΔ, οὕτως ἡ ΒΑ πρὸς τὴν ΑΓ. is to CD, so BA (is) to AC.
῎Ηχθω γὰρ διὰ τοῦ Γ τῇ ΔΑ παράλληλος ἡ ΓΕ, καὶ For let CE have been drawn through (point) C parδιαχθεῖσα ἡ ΒΑ συμπιπτέτω αὐτῇ κατὰ τὸ Ε. allel to DA. And, BA being drawn through, let it meet
158
STOIQEIWN þ. ELEMENTS BOOK 6
(CE) at (point) E.
†
Β ∆ Γ
Α
Ε
B D C
A
E
Καὶ ἐπεὶ εἰς παραλλήλους τὰς ΑΔ, ΕΓ εὐθεῖα ἐνέπεσεν And since the straight-line AC falls across the parallel
ἡ ΑΓ, ἡ ἄρα ὑπὸ ΑΓΕ γωνία ἴση ἐστὶ τῇ ὑπὸ ΓΑΔ. ἀλλ᾿ (straight-lines) AD and EC, angle ACE is thus equal to
ἡ ὑπὸ ΓΑΔ τῇ ὑπὸ ΒΑΔ ὑπόκειται ἴση· καὶ ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΑΔ CAD [Prop. 1.29]. But, (angle) CAD is assumed (to
ἄρα τῇ ὑπὸ ΑΓΕ ἐστιν ἴση. πάλιν, ἐπεὶ εἰς παραλλήλους be) equal to BAD. Thus, (angle) BAD is also equal to
τὰς ΑΔ, ΕΓ εὐθεῖα ἐνέπεσεν ἡ ΒΑΕ, ἡ ἐκτὸς γωνία ἡ ὑπὸ ACE. Again, since the straight-line BAE falls across the
ΒΑΔ ἴση ἐστὶ τῇ ἐντὸς τῇ ὑπὸ ΑΕΓ. ἐδείχθη δὲ καὶ ἡ ὑπὸ parallel (straight-lines) AD and EC, the external angle
ΑΓΕ τῇ ὑπὸ ΒΑΔ ἴση· καὶ ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΓΕ ἄρα γωνία τῇ ὑπὸ BAD is equal to the internal (angle) AEC [Prop. 1.29].
ΑΕΓ ἐστιν ἴση· ὥστε καὶ πλευρὰ ἡ ΑΕ πλευρᾷ τῇ ΑΓ ἐστιν And (angle) ACE was also shown (to be) equal to BAD.
ἴση. καὶ ἐπεὶ τριγώνου τοῦ ΒΓΕ παρὰ μίαν τῶν πλευρῶν Thus, angle ACE is also equal to AEC. And, hence, side
τὴν ΕΓ ἦκται ἡ ΑΔ, ἀνάλογον ἄρα ἐστὶν ὡς ἡ ΒΔ πρὸς τὴν AE is equal to side AC [Prop. 1.6]. And since AD has
ΔΓ, οὕτως ἡ ΒΑ πρὸς τὴν ΑΕ. ἴση δὲ ἡ ΑΕ τῇ ΑΓ· ὡς ἄρα been drawn parallel to one of the sides EC of triangle
ἡ ΒΔ πρὸς τὴν ΔΓ, οὕτως ἡ ΒΑ πρὸς τὴν ΑΓ. BCE, thus, proportionally, as BD is to DC, so BA (is)
᾿Αλλὰ δὴ ἔστω ὡς ἡ ΒΔ πρὸς τὴν ΔΓ, οὕτως ἡ ΒΑ πρὸς to AE [Prop. 6.2]. And AE (is) equal to AC. Thus, as
τὴν ΑΓ, καὶ ἐπεζεύχθω ἡ ΑΔ· λέγω, ὅτι δίχα τέτμηται ἡ BD (is) to DC, so BA (is) to AC.
ὑπὸ ΒΑΓ γωνία ὑπὸ τῆς ΑΔ εὐθείας. And so, let BD be to DC, as BA (is) to AC. And let
Τῶν γὰρ αὐτῶν κατασκευασθέντων, ἐπεί ἐστιν ὡς ἡ ΒΔ AD have been joined. I say that angle BAC has been cut
πρὸς τὴν ΔΓ, οὕτως ἡ ΒΑ πρὸς τὴν ΑΓ, ἀλλὰ καὶ ὡς ἡ ΒΔ in half by the straight-line AD.
πρὸς τὴν ΔΓ, οὕτως ἐστὶν ἡ ΒΑ πρὸς τὴν ΑΕ· τριγώνου For, by the same construction, since as BD is to DC,
γὰρ τοῦ ΒΓΕ παρὰ μίαν τὴν ΕΓ ἦκται ἡ ΑΔ· καὶ ὡς ἄρα ἡ so BA (is) to AC, then also as BD (is) to DC, so BA is
ΒΑ πρὸς τὴν ΑΓ, οὕτως ἡ ΒΑ πρὸς τὴν ΑΕ. ἴση ἄρα ἡ ΑΓ to AE. For AD has been drawn parallel to one (of the
τῇ ΑΕ· ὥστε καὶ γωνία ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΕΓ τῇ ὑπὸ ΑΓΕ ἐστιν ἴση. sides) EC of triangle BCE [Prop. 6.2]. Thus, also, as
ἀλλ᾿ ἡ μὲν ὑπὸ ΑΕΓ τῇ ἐκτὸς τῇ ὑπὸ ΒΑΔ [ἐστιν] ἴση, ἡ BA (is) to AC, so BA (is) to AE [Prop. 5.11]. Thus, AC
δὲ ὑπὸ ΑΓΕ τῇ ἐναλλὰξ τῇ ὑπὸ ΓΑΔ ἐστιν ἴση· καὶ ἡ ὑπὸ (is) equal to AE [Prop. 5.9]. And, hence, angle AEC
ΒΑΔ ἄρα τῇ ὑπὸ ΓΑΔ ἐστιν ἴση. ἡ ἄρα ὑπὸ ΒΑΓ γωνία is equal to ACE [Prop. 1.5]. But, AEC [is] equal to the
δίχα τέτμηται ὑπὸ τῆς ΑΔ εὐθείας. external (angle) BAD, and ACE is equal to the alternate
᾿Εὰν ἄρα τριγώνου ἡ γωνία δίχα τμηθῇ, ἡ δὲ τέμνουσα (angle) CAD [Prop. 1.29]. Thus, (angle) BAD is also
τὴν γωνίαν εὐθεῖα τέμνῃ καὶ τὴν βάσιν, τὰ τῆς βάσεως equal to CAD. Thus, angle BAC has been cut in half by
τμήματα τὸν αὐτὸν ἕξει λόγον ταῖς λοιπαῖς τοῦ τριγώνου the straight-line AD.
πλευραῖς· καὶ ἐὰν τὰ τῆς βάσεως τμήματα τὸν αὐτὸν ἔχῃ Thus, if an angle of a triangle is cut in half, and the
λόγον ταῖς λοιπαῖς τοῦ τριγώνου πλευραῖς, ἡ ἀπὸ τῆς κο- straight-line cutting the angle also cuts the base, then the
ρυφῆς ἐπὶ τὴν τομὴν ἐπιζευγνυμένη εὐθεῖα δίχα τέμνει τὴν segments of the base will have the same ratio as the reτοῦ τριγώνου γωνίαν· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. maining sides of the triangle. And if the segments of the
base have the same ratio as the remaining sides of the
triangle, then the straight-line joining the vertex to the
cutting (point) will cut the angle of the triangle in half.
(Which is) the very thing it was required to show.
† The fact that the two straight-lines meet follows because the sum of ACE and CAE is less than two right-angles, as can easily be demonstrated.
159
STOIQEIWN þ. ELEMENTS BOOK 6
See Post. 5.
dþ. Proposition 4
Τῶν ἰσογωνίων τριγώνων ἀνάλογόν εἰσιν αἱ πλευραὶ αἱ In equiangular triangles the sides about the equal anπερὶ τὰς ἴσας γωνίας καὶ ὁμόλογοι αἱ ὑπὸ τὰς ἴσας γωνίας gles are proportional, and those (sides) subtending equal
ὑποτείνουσαι. angles correspond.
Ζ
∆
Β Γ Ε
Α
B E C
F
D
A
῎Εστω ἰσογώνια τρίγωνα τὰ ΑΒΓ, ΔΓΕ ἴσην ἔχοντα τὴν Let ABC and DCE be equiangular triangles, having
μὲν ὑπὸ ΑΒΓ γωνίαν τῇ ὑπὸ ΔΓΕ, τὴν δὲ ὑπὸ ΒΑΓ τῇ ὑπὸ angle ABC equal to DCE, and (angle) BAC to CDE,
ΓΔΕ καὶ ἔτι τὴν ὑπὸ ΑΓΒ τῇ ὑπὸ ΓΕΔ· λέγω, ὅτι τῶν ΑΒΓ, and, further, (angle) ACB to CED. I say that in trianΔΓΕ τριγώνων ἀνάλογόν εἰσιν αἱ πλευραὶ αἱ περὶ τὰς ἴσας gles ABC and DCE the sides about the equal angles are
γωνίας καὶ ὁμόλογοι αἱ ὑπὸ τὰς ἴσας γωνίας ὑποτείνουσαι. proportional, and those (sides) subtending equal angles
Κείσθω γὰρ ἐπ᾿ εὐθείας ἡ ΒΓ τῇ ΓΕ. καὶ ἐπεὶ αἱ ὑπὸ correspond.
ΑΒΓ, ΑΓΒ γωνίαι δύο ὀρθῶν ἐλάττονές εἰσιν, ἴση δὲ Let BC be placed straight-on to CE. And since
ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΓΒ τῇ ὑπὸ ΔΕΓ, αἱ ἄρα ὑπὸ ΑΒΓ, ΔΕΓ δύο angles ABC and ACB are less than two right-angles
ὀρθῶν ἐλάττονές εἰσιν· αἱ ΒΑ, ΕΔ ἄρα ἐκβαλλόμεναι συμ- [Prop 1.17], and ACB (is) equal to DEC, thus ABC
πεσοῦνται. ἐκβεβλήσθωσαν καὶ συμπιπτέτωσαν κατὰ τὸ Ζ. and DEC are less than two right-angles. Thus, BA and
Καὶ ἐπεὶ ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ὑπὸ ΔΓΕ γωνία τῇ ὑπὸ ΑΒΓ, ED, being produced, will meet [C.N. 5]. Let them have
παράλληλός ἐστιν ἡ ΒΖ τῇ ΓΔ. πάλιν, ἐπεὶ ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ὑπὸ been produced, and let them meet at (point) F.
ΑΓΒ τῇ ὑπὸ ΔΕΓ, παράλληλός ἐστιν ἡ ΑΓ τῇ ΖΕ. παραλ- And since angle DCE is equal to ABC, BF is parallel
ληλόγραμμον ἄρα ἐστὶ τὸ ΖΑΓΔ· ἴση ἄρα ἡ μὲν ΖΑ τῇ ΔΓ, to CD [Prop. 1.28]. Again, since (angle) ACB is equal to
ἡ δὲ ΑΓ τῇ ΖΔ. καὶ ἐπεὶ τριγώνου τοῦ ΖΒΕ παρὰ μίαν τὴν DEC, AC is parallel to FE [Prop. 1.28]. Thus, FACD
ΖΕ ἦκται ἡ ΑΓ, ἐστιν ἄρα ὡς ἡ ΒΑ πρὸς τὴν ΑΖ, οὕτως ἡ is a parallelogram. Thus, FA is equal to DC, and AC to
ΒΓ πρὸς τὴν ΓΕ. ἴση δὲ ἡ ΑΖ τῇ ΓΔ· ὡς ἄρα ἡ ΒΑ πρὸς τὴν FD [Prop. 1.34]. And since AC has been drawn parallel
ΓΔ, οὕτως ἡ ΒΓ πρὸς τὴν ΓΕ, καὶ ἐναλλὰξ ὡς ἡ ΑΒ πρὸς to one (of the sides) FE of triangle FBE, thus as BA
τὴν ΒΓ, οὕτως ἡ ΔΓ πρὸς τὴν ΓΕ. πάλιν, ἐπεὶ παράλληλός is to AF, so BC (is) to CE [Prop. 6.2]. And AF (is)
ἐστιν ἡ ΓΔ τῇ ΒΖ, ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς ἡ ΒΓ πρὸς τὴν ΓΕ, οὕτως equal to CD. Thus, as BA (is) to CD, so BC (is) to CE,
ἡ ΖΔ πρὸς τὴν ΔΕ. ἴση δὲ ἡ ΖΔ τῇ ΑΓ· ὡς ἄρα ἡ ΒΓ πρὸς and, alternately, as AB (is) to BC, so DC (is) to CE
τὴν ΓΕ, οὕτως ἡ ΑΓ πρὸς τὴν ΔΕ, καὶ ἐναλλὰξ ὡς ἡ ΒΓ [Prop. 5.16]. Again, since CD is parallel to BF, thus as
πρὸς τὴν ΓΑ, οὕτως ἡ ΓΕ πρὸς τὴν ΕΔ. ἐπεὶ οὖν ἐδείχθη BC (is) to CE, so FD (is) to DE [Prop. 6.2]. And FD
ὡς μὲν ἡ ΑΒ πρὸς τὴν ΒΓ, οὕτως ἡ ΔΓ πρὸς τὴν ΓΕ, ὡς (is) equal to AC. Thus, as BC is to CE, so AC (is) to
δὲ ἡ ΒΓ πρὸς τὴν ΓΑ, οὕτως ἡ ΓΕ πρὸς τὴν ΕΔ, δι᾿ ἴσου DE, and, alternately, as BC (is) to CA, so CE (is) to
ἄρα ὡς ἡ ΒΑ πρὸς τὴν ΑΓ, οὕτως ἡ ΓΔ πρὸς τὴν ΔΕ. ED [Prop. 6.2]. Therefore, since it was shown that as
Τῶν ἄρα ἰσογωνίων τριγώνων ἀνάλογόν εἰσιν αἱ πλευραὶ AB (is) to BC, so DC (is) to CE, and as BC (is) to CA,
αἱ περὶ τὰς ἴσας γωνίας καὶ ὁμόλογοι αἱ ὑπὸ τὰς ἴσας γωνίας so CE (is) to ED, thus, via equality, as BA (is) to AC, so
ὑποτείνουσαι· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. CD (is) to DE [Prop. 5.22].
Thus, in equiangular triangles the sides about the
equal angles are proportional, and those (sides) subtend160
STOIQEIWN þ. ELEMENTS BOOK 6
ing equal angles correspond. (Which is) the very thing it
was required to show.
eþ. Proposition 5
᾿Εὰν δύο τρίγωνα τὰς πλευρὰς ἀνάλογον ἔχῃ, ἰσογώνια If two triangles have proportional sides then the trianἔσται τὰ τρίγωνα καὶ ἴσας ἕξει τὰς γωνίας, ὑφ᾿ ἃς αἱ gles will be equiangular, and will have the angles which
ὁμόλογοι πλευραὶ ὑποτείνουσιν. corresponding sides subtend equal.
Α
Β
Γ
Ζ
Η
∆
Ε E
B
C
A D
F
G
῎Εστω δύο τρίγωνα τὰ ΑΒΓ, ΔΕΖ τὰς πλευρὰς ἀνάλογον Let ABC and DEF be two triangles having proporἔχοντα, ὡς μὲν τὴν ΑΒ πρὸς τὴν ΒΓ, οὕτως τὴν ΔΕ πρὸς tional sides, (so that) as AB (is) to BC, so DE (is) to
τὴν ΕΖ, ὡς δὲ τὴν ΒΓ πρὸς τὴν ΓΑ, οὕτως τὴν ΕΖ πρὸς EF, and as BC (is) to CA, so EF (is) to FD, and, furτὴν ΖΔ, καὶ ἔτι ὡς τὴν ΒΑ πρὸς τὴν ΑΓ, οὕτως τὴν ΕΔ ther, as BA (is) to AC, so ED (is) to DF. I say that
πρὸς τὴν ΔΖ. λέγω, ὅτι ἰσογώνιόν ἐστι τὸ ΑΒΓ τρίγωνον triangle ABC is equiangular to triangle DEF, and (that
τῷ ΔΕΖ τριγώνῳ καὶ ἴσας ἕξουσι τὰς γωνίας, ὑφ᾿ ἃς αἱ the triangles) will have the angles which corresponding
ὁμόλογοι πλευραὶ ὑποτείνουσιν, τὴν μὲν ὑπὸ ΑΒΓ τῇ ὑπὸ sides subtend equal. (That is), (angle) ABC (equal) to
ΔΕΖ, τὴν δὲ ὑπὸ ΒΓΑ τῇ ὑπὸ ΕΖΔ καὶ ἔτι τὴν ὑπὸ ΒΑΓ DEF, BCA to EFD, and, further, BAC to EDF.
τῇ ὑπὸ ΕΔΖ. For let (angle) FEG, equal to angle ABC, and (anΣυνεστάτω γὰρ πρὸς τῇ ΕΖ εὐθείᾳ καὶ τοῖς πρὸς αὐτῇ gle) EFG, equal to ACB, have been constructed on the
σημείοις τοῖς Ε, Ζ τῇ μὲν ὑπὸ ΑΒΓ γωνίᾳ ἴση ἡ ὑπὸ ΖΕΗ, straight-line EF at the points E and F on it (respectively)
τῇ δὲ ὑπὸ ΑΓΒ ἴση ἡ ὑπὸ ΕΖΗ· λοιπὴ ἄρα ἡ πρὸς τῷ Α [Prop. 1.23]. Thus, the remaining (angle) at A is equal
λοιπῇ τῇ πρὸς τῷ Η ἐστιν ἴση. to the remaining (angle) at G [Prop. 1.32].
῎Ισογώνιον ἄρα ἐστὶ τὸ ΑΒΓ τρίγωνον τῷ ΕΗΖ [τριγών- Thus, triangle ABC is equiangular to [triangle] EGF.
ῳ]. τῶν ἄρα ΑΒΓ, ΕΗΖ τριγώνων ἀνάλογόν εἰσιν αἱ πλευραὶ Thus, for triangles ABC and EGF, the sides about the
αἱ περὶ τὰς ἴσας γωνίας καὶ ὁμόλογοι αἱ ὑπὸ τὰς ἴσας γωνίας equal angles are proportional, and (those) sides subtendὑποτείνουσαι· ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς ἡ ΑΒ πρὸς τὴν ΒΓ, [οὕτως] ing equal angles correspond [Prop. 6.4]. Thus, as AB
ἡ ΗΕ πρὸς τὴν ΕΖ. ἀλλ᾿ ὡς ἡ ΑΒ πρὸς τὴν ΒΓ, οὕτως is to BC, [so] GE (is) to EF. But, as AB (is) to BC,
ὑπόκειται ἡ ΔΕ πρὸς τὴν ΕΖ· ὡς ἄρα ἡ ΔΕ πρὸς τὴν ΕΖ, so, it was assumed, (is) DE to EF. Thus, as DE (is) to
οὕτως ἡ ΗΕ πρὸς τὴν ΕΖ. ἑκατέρα ἄρα τῶν ΔΕ, ΗΕ πρὸς EF, so GE (is) to EF [Prop. 5.11]. Thus, DE and GE
τὴν ΕΖ τὸν αὐτὸν ἔχει λόγον· ἴση ἄρα ἐστὶν ἡ ΔΕ τῇ ΗΕ. each have the same ratio to EF. Thus, DE is equal to
διὰ τὰ αὐτὰ δὴ καὶ ἡ ΔΖ τῇ ΗΖ ἐστιν ἴση. ἐπεὶ οὖν ἴση ἐστὶν GE [Prop. 5.9]. So, for the same (reasons), DF is also
ἡ ΔΕ τῇ ΕΗ, κοινὴ δὲ ἡ ΕΖ, δύο δὴ αἱ ΔΕ, ΕΖ δυσὶ ταῖς ΗΕ, equal to GF. Therefore, since DE is equal to EG, and
ΕΖ ἴσαι εἰσίν· καὶ βάσις ἡ ΔΖ βάσει τῇ ΖΗ [ἐστιν] ἴση· γωνία EF (is) common, the two (sides) DE, EF are equal to
ἄρα ἡ ὑπὸ ΔΕΖ γωνίᾳ τῇ ὑπὸ ΗΕΖ ἐστιν ἴση, καὶ τὸ ΔΕΖ the two (sides) GE, EF (respectively). And base DF
τρίγωνον τῷ ΗΕΖ τριγώνῳ ἴσον, καὶ αἱ λοιπαὶ γωνίαι ταῖς [is] equal to base FG. Thus, angle DEF is equal to
λοιπαῖς γωνίαις ἴσαι, ὑφ᾿ ἃς αἱ ἴσαι πλευραὶ ὑποτείνουσιν. angle GEF [Prop. 1.8], and triangle DEF (is) equal
ἴση ἄρα ἐστὶ καὶ ἡ μὲν ὑπὸ ΔΖΕ γωνία τῇ ὑπὸ ΗΖΕ, ἡ δὲ to triangle GEF, and the remaining angles (are) equal
ὑπὸ ΕΔΖ τῇ ὑπὸ ΕΗΖ. καὶ ἐπεὶ ἡ μὲν ὑπὸ ΖΕΔ τῇ ὑπὸ to the remaining angles which the equal sides subtend
ΗΕΖ ἐστιν ἴση, ἀλλ᾿ ἡ ὑπὸ ΗΕΖ τῇ ὑπὸ ΑΒΓ, καὶ ἡ ὑπὸ [Prop. 1.4]. Thus, angle DFE is also equal to GFE, and
161
STOIQEIWN þ. ELEMENTS BOOK 6
ΑΒΓ ἄρα γωνία τῇ ὑπὸ ΔΕΖ ἐστιν ἴση. διὰ τὰ αὐτὰ δὴ καὶ (angle) EDF to EGF. And since (angle) FED is equal
ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΓΒ τῇ ὑπὸ ΔΖΕ ἐστιν ἴση, καὶ ἔτι ἡ πρὸς τῷ Α τῇ to GEF, and (angle) GEF to ABC, angle ABC is thus
πρὸς τῷ Δ· ἰσογώνιον ἄρα ἐστὶ τὸ ΑΒΓ τρίγωνον τῷ ΔΕΖ also equal to DEF. So, for the same (reasons), (angle)
τριγώνῳ. ACB is also equal to DFE, and, further, the (angle) at A
᾿Εὰν ἄρα δύο τρίγωνα τὰς πλευρὰς ἀνάλογον ἔχῃ, to the (angle) at D. Thus, triangle ABC is equiangular
ἰσογώνια ἔσται τὰ τρίγωνα καὶ ἴσας ἕξει τὰς γωνίας, ὑφ᾿ to triangle DEF.
ἃς αἱ ὁμόλογοι πλευραὶ ὑποτείνουσιν· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. Thus, if two triangles have proportional sides then the
triangles will be equiangular, and will have the angles
which corresponding sides subtend equal. (Which is) the
very thing it was required to show.
þ. Proposition 6
᾿Εὰν δύο τρίγωνα μίαν γωνίαν μιᾷ γωνίᾳ ἴσην ἔχῃ, περὶ If two triangles have one angle equal to one angle,
δὲ τὰς ἴσας γωνίας τὰς πλευρὰς ἀνάλογον, ἰσογώνια ἔσται and the sides about the equal angles proportional, then
τὰ τρίγωνα καὶ ἴσας ἕξει τὰς γωνίας, ὑφ᾿ ἃς αἱ ὁμόλογοι the triangles will be equiangular, and will have the angles
πλευραὶ ὑποτείνουσιν. which corresponding sides subtend equal.
Ζ
Β Γ
Α
Η
∆
Ε
G
A
B C
E F
D
῎Εστω δύο τρίγωνα τὰ ΑΒΓ, ΔΕΖ μίαν γωνίαν τὴν ὑπὸ Let ABC and DEF be two triangles having one angle,
ΒΑΓ μιᾷ γωνίᾳ τῇ ὑπὸ ΕΔΖ ἴσην ἔχοντα, περὶ δὲ τὰς ἴσας BAC, equal to one angle, EDF (respectively), and the
γωνίας τὰς πλευρὰς ἀνάλογον, ὡς τὴν ΒΑ πρὸς τὴν ΑΓ, sides about the equal angles proportional, (so that) as BA
οὕτως τὴν ΕΔ πρὸς τὴν ΔΖ· λέγω, ὅτι ἰσογώνιόν ἐστι τὸ (is) to AC, so ED (is) to DF. I say that triangle ABC is
ΑΒΓ τρίγωνον τῷ ΔΕΖ τριγώνῳ καὶ ἴσην ἕξει τὴν ὑπὸ ΑΒΓ equiangular to triangle DEF, and will have angle ABC
γωνίαν τῇ ὑπὸ ΔΕΖ, τὴν δὲ ὑπὸ ΑΓΒ τῇ ὑπὸ ΔΖΕ. equal to DEF, and (angle) ACB to DFE.
Συνεστάτω γὰρ πρὸς τῇ ΔΖ εὐθείᾳ καὶ τοῖς πρὸς αὐτῇ For let (angle) FDG, equal to each of BAC and
σημείοις τοῖς Δ, Ζ ὁποτέρᾳ μὲν τῶν ὑπὸ ΒΑΓ, ΕΔΖ ἴση EDF, and (angle) DFG, equal to ACB, have been conἡ ὑπὸ ΖΔΗ, τῇ δὲ ὑπὸ ΑΓΒ ἴση ἡ ὑπὸ ΔΖΗ· λοιπὴ ἄρα ἡ structed on the straight-line AF at the points D and F on
πρὸς τῷ Β γωνία λοιπῇ τῇ πρὸς τῷ Η ἴση ἐστίν. it (respectively) [Prop. 1.23]. Thus, the remaining angle
᾿Ισογώνιον ἄρα ἐστὶ τὸ ΑΒΓ τρίγωνον τῷ ΔΗΖ at B is equal to the remaining angle at G [Prop. 1.32].
τριγώνῳ. ἀνάλογον ἄρα ἐστὶν ὡς ἡ ΒΑ πρὸς τὴν ΑΓ, οὕτως Thus, triangle ABC is equiangular to triangle DGF.
ἡ ΗΔ πρὸς τὴν ΔΖ. ὑπόκειται δὲ καὶ ὡς ἡ ΒΑ πρὸς τὴν ΑΓ, Thus, proportionally, as BA (is) to AC, so GD (is) to
οὕτως ἡ ΕΔ πρὸς τὴν ΔΖ· καὶ ὡς ἄρα ἡ ΕΔ πρὸς τὴν ΔΖ, DF [Prop. 6.4]. And it was also assumed that as BA
οὕτως ἡ ΗΔ πρὸς τὴν ΔΖ. ἴση ἄρα ἡ ΕΔ τῇ ΔΗ· καὶ κοινὴ is) to AC, so ED (is) to DF. And, thus, as ED (is)
ἡ ΔΖ· δύο δὴ αἱ ΕΔ, ΔΖ δυσὶ ταῖς ΗΔ, ΔΖ ἴσας εἰσίν· καὶ to DF, so GD (is) to DF [Prop. 5.11]. Thus, ED (is)
γωνία ἡ ὑπὸ ΕΔΖ γωνίᾳ τῇ ὑπὸ ΗΔΖ [ἐστιν] ἴση· βάσις equal to DG [Prop. 5.9]. And DF (is) common. So, the
ἄρα ἡ ΕΖ βάσει τῇ ΗΖ ἐστιν ἴση, καὶ τὸ ΔΕΖ τρίγωνον τῷ two (sides) ED, DF are equal to the two (sides) GD,
ΗΔΖ τριγώνῳ ἴσον ἐστίν, καὶ αἱ λοιπαὶ γωνίαι ταῖς λοιπαῖς DF (respectively). And angle EDF [is] equal to angle
γωνίαις ἴσας ἔσονται, ὐφ᾿ ἃς ἴσας πλευραὶ ὑποτείνουσιν. ἴση GDF. Thus, base EF is equal to base GF, and triangle
ἄρα ἐστὶν ἡ μὲν ὑπὸ ΔΖΗ τῇ ὑπο ΔΖΕ, ἡ δὲ ὑπὸ ΔΗΖ DEF is equal to triangle GDF, and the remaining angles
162
STOIQEIWN þ. ELEMENTS BOOK 6
τῇ ὑπὸ ΔΕΖ. ἀλλ᾿ ἡ ὑπὸ ΔΖΗ τῇ ὑπὸ ΑΓΒ ἐστιν ἴση· καὶ will be equal to the remaining angles which the equal
ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΓΒ ἄρα τῇ ὑπὸ ΔΖΕ ἐστιν ἴση. ὑπόκειται δὲ καὶ sides subtend [Prop. 1.4]. Thus, (angle) DFG is equal
ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΑΓ τῇ ὑπὸ ΕΔΖ ἴση· καὶ λοιπὴ ἄρα ἡ πρὸς τῷ Β to DFE, and (angle) DGF to DEF. But, (angle) DFG
λοιπῇ τῇ πρὸς τῷ Ε ἴση ἐστίν· ἰσογώνιον ἄρα ἐστὶ τὸ ΑΒΓ is equal to ACB. Thus, (angle) ACB is also equal to
τρίγωνον τῷ ΔΕΖ τριγώνῳ. DFE. And (angle) BAC was also assumed (to be) equal
᾿Εὰν ἄρα δύο τρίγωνα μίαν γωνίαν μιᾷ γωνίᾳ ἴσην ἔχῃ, to EDF. Thus, the remaining (angle) at B is equal to the
περὶ δὲ τὰς ἴσας γωνίας τὰς πλευρὰς ἀνάλογον, ἰσογώνια remaining (angle) at E [Prop. 1.32]. Thus, triangle ABC
ἔσται τὰ τρίγωνα καὶ ἴσας ἕξει τὰς γωνίας, ὑφ᾿ ἃς αἱ is equiangular to triangle DEF.
ὁμόλογοι πλευραὶ ὑποτείνουσιν· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. Thus, if two triangles have one angle equal to one
angle, and the sides about the equal angles proportional,
then the triangles will be equiangular, and will have the
angles which corresponding sides subtend equal. (Which
is) the very thing it was required to show.
zþ. Proposition 7
᾿Εὰν δύο τρίγωνα μίαν γωνίαν μιᾷ γωνίᾳ ἴσην ἔχῃ, If two triangles have one angle equal to one angle,
περὶ δὲ ἄλλας γωνίας τὰς πλευρὰς ἀνάλογον, τῶν δὲ and the sides about other angles proportional, and the
λοιπῶν ἑκατέραν ἅμα ἤτοι ἐλάσσονα ἢ μὴ ἐλάσσονα ὀρθῆς, remaining angles either both less than, or both not less
ἰσογώνια ἔσται τὰ τρίγωνα καὶ ἴσας ἕξει τὰς γωνίας, περὶ than, right-angles, then the triangles will be equiangular,
ἃς ἀνάλογόν εἰσιν αἱ πλευραί. and will have the angles about which the sides are proportional equal.
∆
Η
Γ
Ζ
Β
Ε
Α
D
B
G
C
E
F
A
῎Εστω δύο τρίγωνα τὰ ΑΒΓ, ΔΕΖ μίαν γωνίαν μιᾷ Let ABC and DEF be two triangles having one anγωνίᾳ ἴσην ἔχοντα τὴν ὑπὸ ΒΑΓ τῇ ὑπὸ ΕΔΖ, περὶ δὲ gle, BAC, equal to one angle, EDF (respectively), and
ἄλλας γωνίας τὰς ὑπὸ ΑΒΓ, ΔΕΖ τὰς πλευρὰς ἀνάλογον, the sides about (some) other angles, ABC and DEF (reὡς τὴν ΑΒ πρὸς τὴν ΒΓ, οὕτως τὴν ΔΕ πρὸς τὴν ΕΖ, spectively), proportional, (so that) as AB (is) to BC, so
τῶν δὲ λοιπῶν τῶν πρὸς τοῖς Γ, Ζ πρότερον ἑκατέραν DE (is) to EF, and the remaining (angles) at C and F,
ἅμα ἐλάσσονα ὀρθῆς· λέγω, ὅτι ἰσογώνιόν ἐστι τὸ ΑΒΓ first of all, both less than right-angles. I say that triangle
τρίγωνον τῷ ΔΕΖ τριγώνῳ, καὶ ἴση ἔσται ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΒΓ γωνία ABC is equiangular to triangle DEF, and (that) angle
τῇ ὑπὸ ΔΕΖ, καὶ λοιπὴ δηλονότι ἡ πρὸς τῷ Γ λοιπῇ τῇ πρὸς ABC will be equal to DEF, and (that) the remaining
τῷ Ζ ἴση. (angle) at C (will be) manifestly equal to the remaining
Εἰ γὰρ ἄνισός ἐστιν ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΒΓ γωνία τῇ ὑπὸ ΔΕΖ, (angle) at F.
μία αὐτῶν μείζων ἐστίν. ἔστω μείζων ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΒΓ. καὶ συ- For if angle ABC is not equal to (angle) DEF then
νεστάτω πρὸς τῇ ΑΒ εὐθείᾳ καὶ τῷ πρὸς αὐτῇ σημείῳ τῷ one of them is greater. Let ABC be greater. And let (anΒ τῇ ὑπὸ ΔΕΖ γωνίᾳ ἴση ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΒΗ. gle) ABG, equal to (angle) DEF, have been constructed
Καὶ ἐπεὶ ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ μὲν Α γωνία τῇ Δ, ἡ δὲ ὑπὸ ΑΒΗ on the straight-line AB at the point B on it [Prop. 1.23].
τῇ ὑπὸ ΔΕΖ, λοιπὴ ἄρα ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΗΒ λοιπῇ τῇ ὑπὸ ΔΖΕ And since angle A is equal to (angle) D, and (angle)
ἐστιν ἴση. ἰσογώνιον ἄρα ἐστὶ τὸ ΑΒΗ τρίγωνον τῷ ΔΕΖ ABG to DEF, the remaining (angle) AGB is thus equal
163
STOIQEIWN þ. ELEMENTS BOOK 6
τριγώνῳ. ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς ἡ ΑΒ πρὸς τὴν ΒΗ, οὕτως ἡ ΔΕ to the remaining (angle) DFE [Prop. 1.32]. Thus, trianπρὸς τὴν ΕΖ. ὡς δὲ ἡ ΔΕ πρὸς τὴν ΕΖ, [οὕτως] ὑπόκειται ἡ gle ABG is equiangular to triangle DEF. Thus, as AB is
ΑΒ πρὸς τὴν ΒΓ· ἡ ΑΒ ἄρα πρὸς ἑκατέραν τῶν ΒΓ, ΒΗ τὸν to BG, so DE (is) to EF [Prop. 6.4]. And as DE (is) to
αὐτὸν ἔχει λόγον· ἴση ἄρα ἡ ΒΓ τῇ ΒΗ. ὥστε καὶ γωνία ἡ EF, [so] it was assumed (is) AB to BC. Thus, AB has
πρὸς τῷ Γ γωνίᾳ τῇ ὑπὸ ΒΗΓ ἐστιν ἴση. ἐλάττων δὲ ὀρθῆς the same ratio to each of BC and BG [Prop. 5.11]. Thus,
ὑπόκειται ἡ πρὸς τῷ Γ· ἐλάττων ἄρα ἐστὶν ὀρθῆς καὶ ὑπὸ BC (is) equal to BG [Prop. 5.9]. And, hence, the angle
ΒΗΓ· ὥστε ἡ ἐφεξῆς αὐτῇ γωνία ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΗΒ μείζων ἐστὶν at C is equal to angle BGC [Prop. 1.5]. And the angle
ὀρθῆς. καὶ ἐδείχθη ἴση οὖσα τῇ πρὸς τῷ Ζ· καὶ ἡ πρὸς τῷ Ζ at C was assumed (to be) less than a right-angle. Thus,
ἄρα μείζων ἐστὶν ὀρθῆς. ὑπόκειται δὲ ἐλάσσων ὀρθῆς· ὅπερ (angle) BGC is also less than a right-angle. Hence, the
ἐστὶν ἄτοπον. οὐκ ἄρα ἄνισός ἐστιν ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΒΓ γωνία τῇ adjacent angle to it, AGB, is greater than a right-angle
ὑπὸ ΔΕΖ· ἴση ἄρα. ἔστι δὲ καὶ ἡ πρὸς τῷ Α ἴση τῇ πρὸς τῷ [Prop. 1.13]. And (AGB) was shown to be equal to the
Δ· καὶ λοιπὴ ἄρα ἡ πρὸς τῷ Γ λοιπῇ τῇ πρὸς τῷ Ζ ἴση ἐστίν. (angle) at F. Thus, the (angle) at F is also greater than a
ἰσογώνιον ἄρα ἐστὶ τὸ ΑΒΓ τρίγωνον τῷ ΔΕΖ τριγώνῳ. right-angle. But it was assumed (to be) less than a right-
᾿Αλλὰ δὴ πάλιν ὑποκείσθω ἑκατέρα τῶν πρὸς τοῖς Γ, Ζ μὴ angle. The very thing is absurd. Thus, angle ABC is not
ἐλάσσων ὀρθῆς· λέγω πάλιν, ὅτι καὶ οὕτως ἐστὶν ἰσογώνιον unequal to (angle) DEF. Thus, (it is) equal. And the
τὸ ΑΒΓ τρίγωνον τῷ ΔΕΖ τριγώνῳ. (angle) at A is also equal to the (angle) at D. And thus
Τῶν γὰρ αὐτῶν κατασκευασθέντων ὁμοίως δείξομεν, the remaining (angle) at C is equal to the remaining (anὅτι ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ΒΓ τῇ ΒΗ· ὥστε καὶ γωνία ἡ πρὸς τῷ Γ τῇ gle) at F [Prop. 1.32]. Thus, triangle ABC is equiangular
ὑπὸ ΒΗΓ ἴση ἐστίν. οὐκ ἐλάττων δὲ ὀρθῆς ἡ πρὸς τῷ Γ· to triangle DEF.
οὐκ ἐλάττων ἄρα ὀρθῆς οὐδὲ ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΗΓ. τριγώνου δὴ τοῦ But, again, let each of the (angles) at C and F be
ΒΗΓ αἱ δύο γωνίαι δύο ὀρθῶν οὔκ εἰσιν ἐλάττονες· ὅπερ assumed (to be) not less than a right-angle. I say, again,
ἐστὶν ἀδύνατον. οὐκ ἄρα πάλιν ἄνισός ἐστιν ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΒΓ that triangle ABC is equiangular to triangle DEF in this
γωνία τῇ ὑπὸ ΔΕΖ· ἴση ἄρα. ἔστι δὲ καὶ ἡ πρὸς τῷ Α τῇ case also.
πρὸς τῷ Δ ἴση· λοιπὴ ἄρα ἡ πρὸς τῷ Γ λοιπῇ τῇ πρὸς τῷ Ζ For, with the same construction, we can similarly
ἴση ἐστίν. ἰσογώνιον ἄρα ἐστὶ τὸ ΑΒΓ τρίγωνον τῷ ΔΕΖ show that BC is equal to BG. Hence, also, the angle
τριγώνῳ. at C is equal to (angle) BGC. And the (angle) at C (is)
᾿Εὰν ἄρα δύο τρίγωνα μίαν γωνίαν μιᾷ γωνίᾳ ἴσην ἔχῃ, not less than a right-angle. Thus, BGC (is) not less than
περὶ δὲ ἄλλας γωνίας τὰς πλευρὰς ἀνάλογον, τῶν δὲ λοιπῶν a right-angle either. So, in triangle BGC the (sum of)
ἑκατέραν ἅμα ἐλάττονα ἢ μὴ ἐλάττονα ὀρθῆς, ἰσογώνια two angles is not less than two right-angles. The very
ἔσται τὰ τρίγωνα καὶ ἴσας ἕξει τὰς γωνίας, περὶ ἃς ἀνάλογόν thing is impossible [Prop. 1.17]. Thus, again, angle ABC
εἰσιν αἱ πλευραί· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. is not unequal to DEF. Thus, (it is) equal. And the (angle) at A is also equal to the (angle) at D. Thus, the
remaining (angle) at C is equal to the remaining (angle)
at F [Prop. 1.32]. Thus, triangle ABC is equiangular to
triangle DEF.
Thus, if two triangles have one angle equal to one
angle, and the sides about other angles proportional, and
the remaining angles both less than, or both not less than,
right-angles, then the triangles will be equiangular, and
will have the angles about which the sides (are) proportional equal. (Which is) the very thing it was required to
show.
hþ. Proposition 8
᾿Εὰν ἐν ὀρθογωνίῳ τριγώνῳ ἀπό τῆς ὀρθῆς γωνίας ἐπὶ If, in a right-angled triangle, a (straight-line) is drawn
τὴν βάσιν κάθετος ἀχθῇ, τὰ πρὸς τῇ καθέτῳ τρίγωνα ὅμοιά from the right-angle perpendicular to the base then the
ἐστι τῷ τε ὅλῳ καὶ ἀλλήλοις. triangles around the perpendicular are similar to the
῎Εστω τρίγωνον ὀρθογώνιον τὸ ΑΒΓ ὀρθὴν ἔχον τὴν whole (triangle), and to one another.
ὑπὸ ΒΑΓ γωνίαν, καὶ ἤχθω ἀπὸ τοῦ Α ἐπὶ τὴν ΒΓ κάθετος Let ABC be a right-angled triangle having the angle
ἡ ΑΔ· λέγω, ὅτι ὅμοιόν ἐστιν ἑκάτερον τῶν ΑΒΔ, ΑΔΓ BAC a right-angle, and let AD have been drawn from
164
STOIQEIWN þ. ELEMENTS BOOK 6
τριγώνων ὅλῳ τῷ ΑΒΓ καὶ ἔτι ἀλλήλοις. A, perpendicular to BC [Prop. 1.12]. I say that triangles
ABD and ADC are each similar to the whole (triangle)
ABC and, further, to one another.
Β Γ ∆
Α
B C D
A
᾿Επεὶ γὰρ ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΑΓ τῇ ὑπὸ ΑΔΒ· ὀρθὴ For since (angle) BAC is equal to ADB—for each
γὰρ ἑκατέρα· καὶ κοινὴ τῶν δύο τριγώνων τοῦ τε ΑΒΓ καὶ (are) right-angles—and the (angle) at B (is) common
τοῦ ΑΒΔ ἡ πρὸς τῷ Β, λοιπὴ ἄρα ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΓΒ λοιπῇ τῇ to the two triangles ABC and ABD, the remaining (anὑπο ΒΑΔ ἐστιν ἴση· ἰσογώνιον ἄρα ἐστὶ τὸ ΑΒΓ τρίγωνον gle) ACB is thus equal to the remaining (angle) BAD
τῷ ΑΒΔ τριγώνῳ. ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς ἡ ΒΓ ὑποτείνουσα τὴν [Prop. 1.32]. Thus, triangle ABC is equiangular to triὀρθὴν τοῦ ΑΒΓ τριγώνου πρὸς τὴν ΒΑ ὑποτείνουσαν τὴν angle ABD. Thus, as BC, subtending the right-angle in
ὀρθὴν τοῦ ΑΒΔ τριγώνου, οὕτως αὐτὴ ἡ ΑΒ ὑποτείνουσα triangle ABC, is to BA, subtending the right-angle in triτὴν πρὸς τῷ Γ γωνίαν τοῦ ΑΒΓ τριγώνου πρὸς τὴν ΒΔ angle ABD, so the same AB, subtending the angle at C
ὑποτείνουσαν τὴν ἴσην τὴν ὑπὸ ΒΑΔ τοῦ ΑΒΔ τριγώνου, in triangle ABC, (is) to BD, subtending the equal (anκαὶ ἔτι ἡ ΑΓ πρὸς τὴν ΑΔ ὑποτείνουσαν τὴν πρὸς τῷ Β gle) BAD in triangle ABD, and, further, (so is) AC to
γωνίαν κοινὴν τῶν δύο τριγώνων. τὸ ΑΒΓ ἄρα τρίγωνον AD, (both) subtending the angle at B common to the
τῷ ΑΒΔ τριγώνῳ ἰσογώνιόν τέ ἐστι καὶ τὰς περὶ τὰς ἴσας two triangles [Prop. 6.4]. Thus, triangle ABC is equianγωνίας πλευρὰς ἀνάλογον ἔχει. ὅμοιον ἄμα [ἐστὶ] τὸ ΑΒΓ gular to triangle ABD, and has the sides about the equal
τρίγωνον τῷ ΑΒΔ τριγώνῳ. ὁμοίως δὴ δείξομεν, ὅτι καὶ angles proportional. Thus, triangle ABC [is] similar to
τῷ ΑΔΓ τριγώνῳ ὅμοιόν ἐστι τὸ ΑΒΓ τρίγωνον· ἑκάτερον triangle ABD [Def. 6.1]. So, similarly, we can show that
ἄρα τῶν ΑΒΔ, ΑΔΓ [τριγώνων] ὅμοιόν ἐστιν ὅλῳ τῷ ΑΒΓ. triangle ABC is also similar to triangle ADC. Thus, [triΛέγω δή, ὅτι καὶ ἀλλήλοις ἐστὶν ὅμοια τὰ ΑΒΔ, ΑΔΓ angles] ABD and ADC are each similar to the whole
τρίγωνα. (triangle) ABC.
᾿Επεὶ γὰρ ὀρθὴ ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΔΑ ὀρθῇ τῇ ὑπὸ ΑΔΓ ἐστιν So I say that triangles ABD and ADC are also similar
ἴση, ἀλλὰ μὴν καὶ ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΑΔ τῇ πρὸς τῷ Γ ἐδείχθη ἴση, to one another.
καὶ λοιπὴ ἄρα ἡ πρὸς τῷ Β λοιπῇ τῇ ὑπὸ ΔΑΓ ἐστιν ἴση· For since the right-angle BDA is equal to the rightἰσογώνιον ἄρα ἐστὶ τὸ ΑΒΔ τρίγωνον τῷ ΑΔΓ τριγώνῳ. angle ADC, and, indeed, (angle) BAD was also shown
ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς ἡ ΒΔ τοῦ ΑΒΔ τριγώνου ὑποτείνουσα τὴν (to be) equal to the (angle) at C, thus the remaining (anὑπὸ ΒΑΔ πρὸς τὴν ΔΑ τοῦ ΑΔΓ τριγώνου ὑποτείνουσαν gle) at B is also equal to the remaining (angle) DAC
τὴν πρὸς τῷ Γ ἴσην τῇ ὑπὸ ΒΑΔ, οὕτως αὐτὴ ἡ ΑΔ τοῦ [Prop. 1.32]. Thus, triangle ABD is equiangular to trianΑΒΔ τριγώνου ὑποτείνουσα τὴν πρὸς τῷ Β γωνίαν πρὸς gle ADC. Thus, as BD, subtending (angle) BAD in triτὴν ΔΓ ὑποτείνουσαν τὴν ὑπὸ ΔΑΓ τοῦ ΑΔΓ τριγώνου angle ABD, is to DA, subtending the (angle) at C in triἴσην τῇ πρὸς τῷ Β, καὶ ἔτι ἡ ΒΑ πρὸς τὴν ΑΓ ὑποτείνουσαι angle ADC, (which is) equal to (angle) BAD, so (is) the
τὰς ὀρθάς· ὅμοιον ἄρα ἐστὶ τὸ ΑΒΔ τρίγωνον τῷ ΑΔΓ same AD, subtending the angle at B in triangle ABD, to
τριγώνῳ. DC, subtending (angle) DAC in triangle ADC, (which
᾿Εὰν ἄρα ἐν ὀρθογωνίῳ τριγώνῳ ἀπὸ τῆς ὀρθῆς γωνίας is) equal to the (angle) at B, and, further, (so is) BA to
ἐπὶ τὴν βάσιν κάθετος ἀχθῇ, τὰ πρὸς τῇ καθέτῳ τρίγωνα AC, (each) subtending right-angles [Prop. 6.4]. Thus,
ὅμοιά ἐστι τῷ τε ὅλῳ καὶ ἀλλήλοις [ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι]. triangle ABD is similar to triangle ADC [Def. 6.1].
Thus, if, in a right-angled triangle, a (straight-line)
is drawn from the right-angle perpendicular to the base
165
STOIQEIWN þ. ELEMENTS BOOK 6
then the triangles around the perpendicular are similar
to the whole (triangle), and to one another. [(Which is)
the very thing it was required to show.]
Pìrisma. Corollary
᾿Εκ δὴ τούτου φανερόν, ὅτι ἐὰν ἐν ὀρθογωνίῳ τριγώνῳ So (it is) clear, from this, that if, in a right-angled triἀπὸ τῆς ὀρθῆς γωνάις ἐπὶ τὴν βάσις κάθετος ἀχθῇ, ἡ angle, a (straight-line) is drawn from the right-angle perἀχθεῖσα τῶν τῆς βάσεως τμημάτων μέση ἀνάλογόν ἐστιν· pendicular to the base then the (straight-line so) drawn
ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. is in mean proportion to the pieces of the base.†
(Which
is) the very thing it was required to show.
†
In other words, the perpendicular is the geometric mean of the pieces.
jþ. Proposition 9
Τῆς δοθείσης εὐθείας τὸ προσταχθὲν μέρος ἀφελεῖν. To cut off a prescribed part from a given straight-line.
Α Β
∆
Ε
Γ
Ζ
C
A F
E
D
B
῎Εστω ἡ δοθεῖσα εὐθεῖα ἡ ΑΒ· δεῖ δὴ τῆς ΑΒ τὸ προ- Let AB be the given straight-line. So it is required to
σταχθὲν μέρος ἀφελεῖν. cut off a prescribed part from AB.
᾿Επιτετάχθω δὴ τὸ τρίτον. [καὶ] διήθχω τις ἀπὸ τοῦ Α So let a third (part) have been prescribed. [And] let
εὐθεῖα ἡ ΑΓ γωνίαν περιέχουσα μετὰ τῆς ΑΒ τυχοῦσαν· καὶ some straight-line AC have been drawn from (point) A,
εἰλήφθω τυχὸν σημεῖον ἐπὶ τῆς ΑΓ τὸ Δ, καὶ κείσθωσαν encompassing a random angle with AB. And let a ranτῇ ΑΔ ἴσαι αἱ ΔΕ, ΕΓ. καὶ ἐπεζεύχθω ἡ ΒΓ, καὶ διὰ τοῦ Δ dom point D have been taken on AC. And let DE and
παράλληλος αὐτῇ ἤχθω ἡ ΔΖ. EC be made equal to AD [Prop. 1.3]. And let BC have
᾿Επεὶ οὖν τριγώνου τοῦ ΑΒΓ παρὰ μίαν τῶν πλευρῶν been joined. And let DF have been drawn through D
τὴν ΒΓ ἦκται ἡ ΖΔ, ἀνάλογον ἄρα ἐστὶν ὡς ἡ ΓΔ πρὸς τὴν parallel to it [Prop. 1.31].
ΔΑ, οὕτως ἡ ΒΖ πρὸς τὴν ΖΑ. διπλῆ δὲ ἡ ΓΔ τῆς ΔΑ· Therefore, since FD has been drawn parallel to one
διπλῆ ἄρα καὶ ἡ ΒΖ τῆς ΖΑ· τριπλῆ ἄρα ἡ ΒΑ τῆς ΑΖ. of the sides, BC, of triangle ABC, then, proportionally,
Τῆς ἄρα δοθείσης εὐθείας τῆς ΑΒ τὸ ἐπιταχθὲν τρίτον as CD is to DA, so BF (is) to FA [Prop. 6.2]. And CD
μέρος ἀφῄρηται τὸ ΑΖ· ὅπερ ἔδει ποιῆσαι. (is) double DA. Thus, BF (is) also double FA. Thus,
BA (is) triple AF.
Thus, the prescribed third part, AF, has been cut off
from the given straight-line, AB. (Which is) the very
thing it was required to do.
iþ. Proposition 10
Τὴν δοθεῖσαν εὐθεῖαν ἄτμητον τῇ δοθείσῃ τετμημένῃ To cut a given uncut straight-line similarly to a given
ὁμοίως τεμεῖν. cut (straight-line).
166
STOIQEIWN þ. ELEMENTS BOOK 6
∆
Α
Γ
Ε
Θ Κ
Ζ Η Β
H
A
E
C
K
F B G
D
῎Εστω ἡ μὲν δοθεῖσα εὐθεῖα ἅτμητος ἡ ΑΒ, ἡ δὲ τε- Let AB be the given uncut straight-line, and AC a
τμημένη ἡ ΑΓ κατὰ τὰ Δ, Ε σημεῖα, καὶ κείσθωσαν ὥστε (straight-line) cut at points D and E, and let (AC) be
γωνίαν τυχοῦσαν περιέχειν, καὶ ἐπεζεύχθω ἡ ΓΒ, καὶ διὰ laid down so as to encompass a random angle (with AB).
τῶν Δ, Ε τῇ ΒΓ παράλληλοι ἤχθωσαν αἱ ΔΖ, ΕΗ, διὰ δὲ And let CB have been joined. And let DF and EG have
τοῦ Δ τῇ ΑΒ παράλληλος ἤχθω ἡ ΔΘΚ. been drawn through (points) D and E (respectively),
Παραλληλόγραμμον ἄρα ἐστὶν ἑκάτερον τῶν ΖΘ, ΘΒ· parallel to BC, and let DHK have been drawn through
ἴση ἄρα ἡ μὲν ΔΘ τῇ ΖΗ, ἡ δὲ ΘΚ τῇ ΗΒ. καὶ ἐπεὶ τριγώνου (point) D, parallel to AB [Prop. 1.31].
τοῦ ΔΚΓ παρὰ μίαν τῶν πλευρῶν τὴν ΚΓ εὐθεῖα ἦκται ἡ Thus, FH and HB are each parallelograms. Thus,
ΘΕ, ἀνάλογον ἄρα ἐστὶν ὡς ἡ ΓΕ πρὸς τὴν ΕΔ, οὕτως ἡ DH (is) equal to FG, and HK to GB [Prop. 1.34]. And
ΚΘ πρὸς τὴν ΘΔ. ἴση δὲ ἡ μὲν ΚΘ τῇ ΒΗ, ἡ δὲ ΘΔ τῇ since the straight-line HE has been drawn parallel to one
ΗΖ. ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς ἡ ΓΕ πρὸς τὴν ΕΔ, οὕτως ἡ ΒΗ πρὸς τὴν of the sides, KC, of triangle DKC, thus, proportionally,
ΗΖ. πάλιν, ἐπεὶ τριγώνου τοῦ ΑΗΕ παρὰ μίαν τῶν πλευρῶν as CE is to ED, so KH (is) to HD [Prop. 6.2]. And
τὴν ΗΕ ἦκται ἡ ΖΔ, ἀνάλογον ἄρα ἐστὶν ὡς ἡ ΕΔ πρὸς τὴν KH (is) equal to BG, and HD to GF. Thus, as CE is
ΔΑ, οὕτως ἡ ΗΖ πρὸς τὴν ΖΑ. ἐδείχθη δὲ καὶ ὡς ἡ ΓΕ to ED, so BG (is) to GF. Again, since FD has been
πρὸς τὴν ΕΔ, οὕτως ἡ ΒΗ πρὸς τὴν ΗΖ· ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς μὲν drawn parallel to one of the sides, GE, of triangle AGE,
ἡ ΓΕ πρὸς τὴν ΕΔ, οὕτως ἡ ΒΗ πρὸς τὴν ΗΖ, ὡς δὲ ἡ ΕΔ thus, proportionally, as ED is to DA, so GF (is) to FA
πρὸς τὴν ΔΑ, οὕτως ἡ ΗΖ πρὸς τὴν ΖΑ. [Prop. 6.2]. And it was also shown that as CE (is) to
῾Η ἄρα δοθεῖσα εὐθεῖα ἄτμητος ἡ ΑΒ τῇ δοθείσῃ εὐθείᾳ ED, so BG (is) to GF. Thus, as CE is to ED, so BG (is)
τετμημένῃ τῇ ΑΓ ὁμοίως τέτμηται· ὅπερ ἔδει ποιῆσαι· to GF, and as ED (is) to DA, so GF (is) to FA.
Thus, the given uncut straight-line, AB, has been cut
similarly to the given cut straight-line, AC. (Which is)
the very thing it was required to do.
iaþ. Proposition 11
Δύο δοθεισῶν εὐθειῶν τρίτην ἀνάλογον προσευρεῖν. To find a third (straight-line) proportional to two
῎Εστωσαν αἱ δοθεῖσαι [δύο εὐθεῖαι] αἱ ΒΑ, ΑΓ καὶ given straight-lines.
κείσθωσαν γωνίαν περιέχουσαι τυχοῦσαν. δεῖ δὴ τῶν ΒΑ, Let BA and AC be the [two] given [straight-lines],
ΑΓ τρίτην ἀνάλογον προσευρεῖν. ἐκβεβλήσθωσαν γὰρ ἐπὶ and let them be laid down encompassing a random angle.
τὰ Δ, Ε σημεῖα, καὶ κείσθω τῇ ΑΓ ἴση ἡ ΒΔ, καὶ ἐπεζεύχθω So it is required to find a third (straight-line) proportional
ἡ ΒΓ, καὶ διὰ τοῦ Δ παράλληλος αὐτῇ ἤχθω ἡ ΔΕ. to BA and AC. For let (BA and AC) have been produced
᾿Επεὶ οὖν τριγώνου τοῦ ΑΔΕ παρὰ μίαν τῶν πλευρῶν to points D and E (respectively), and let BD be made
τὴν ΔΕ ἦκται ἡ ΒΓ, ἀνάλογόν ἐστιν ὡς ἡ ΑΒ πρὸς τὴν equal to AC [Prop. 1.3]. And let BC have been joined.
ΒΔ, οὕτως ἡ ΑΓ πρὸς τὴν ΓΕ. ἴση δὲ ἡ ΒΔ τῇ ΑΓ. ἔστιν And let DE have been drawn through (point) D parallel
ἄρα ὡς ἡ ΑΒ πρὸς τὴν ΑΓ, οὕτως ἡ ΑΓ πρὸς τὴν ΓΕ. to it [Prop. 1.31].
Therefore, since BC has been drawn parallel to one
of the sides DE of triangle ADE, proportionally, as AB is
to BD, so AC (is) to CE [Prop. 6.2]. And BD (is) equal
167
STOIQEIWN þ. ELEMENTS BOOK 6
to AC. Thus, as AB is to AC, so AC (is) to CE.
Ε
Α
Β
Γ
∆
C
B
E
D
A
Δύο ἄρα δοθεισῶν εὐθειῶν τῶν ΑΒ, ΑΓ τρίτη ἀνάλογον Thus, a third (straight-line), CE, has been found
αὐταῖς προσεύρηται ἡ ΓΕ· ὅπερ ἔδει ποιῆσαι. (which is) proportional to the two given straight-lines,
AB and AC. (Which is) the very thing it was required to
do.
ibþ. Proposition 12
Τριῶν δοθεισῶν εὐθειῶν τετάρτην ἀνάλογον προ- To find a fourth (straight-line) proportional to three
σευρεῖν. given straight-lines.
Η
Ζ
Α
Β
Γ
∆ Θ
Ε
D
A
C
B
E
G
H F
῎Εστωσαν αἱ δοθεῖσαι τρεῖς εὐθεῖαι αἱ Α, Β, Γ· δεῖ δὴ Let A, B, and C be the three given straight-lines. So
τῶν Α, Β, Γ τετράτην ἀνάλογον προσευρεῖν. it is required to find a fourth (straight-line) proportional
᾿Εκκείσθωσαν δύο εὐθεῖαι αἱ ΔΕ, ΔΖ γωνίαν περιέχους- to A, B, and C.
αι [τυχοῦσαν] τὴν ὑπὸ ΕΔΖ· καὶ κείσθω τῇ μὲν Α ἴση ἡ ΔΗ, Let the two straight-lines DE and DF be set out enτῇ δὲ Β ἴση ἡ ΗΕ, καὶ ἔτι τῇ Γ ἴση ἡ ΔΘ· καὶ ἐπιζευχθείσης compassing the [random] angle EDF. And let DG be
τῆς ΗΘ παράλληλος αὐτῇ ἤχθω διὰ τοῦ Ε ἡ ΕΖ. made equal to A, and GE to B, and, further, DH to C
᾿Επεὶ οὖν τριγώνου τοῦ ΔΕΖ παρὰ μίαν τὴν ΕΖ ἦκται ἡ [Prop. 1.3]. And GH being joined, let EF have been
ΗΘ, ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς ἡ ΔΗ πρὸς τὴν ΗΕ, οὕτως ἡ ΔΘ πρὸς drawn through (point) E parallel to it [Prop. 1.31].
τὴν ΘΖ. ἴση δὲ ἡ μὲν ΔΗ τῇ Α, ἡ δὲ ΗΕ τῇ Β, ἡ δὲ ΔΘ τῇ Therefore, since GH has been drawn parallel to one
Γ· ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς ἡ Α πρὸς τὴν Β, οὕτως ἡ Γ πρὸς τὴν ΘΖ. of the sides EF of triangle DEF, thus as DG is to GE,
Τριῶν ἄρα δοθεισῶν εὐθειῶν τῶν Α, Β, Γ τετάρτη so DH (is) to HF [Prop. 6.2]. And DG (is) equal to A,
ἀνάλογον προσεύρηται ἡ ΘΖ· ὅπερ ἔδει ποιῆσαι. and GE to B, and DH to C. Thus, as A is to B, so C (is)
168
STOIQEIWN þ. ELEMENTS BOOK 6
to HF.
Thus, a fourth (straight-line), HF, has been found
(which is) proportional to the three given straight-lines,
A, B, and C. (Which is) the very thing it was required to
do.
igþ. Proposition 13
Δύο δοθεισῶν εὐθειῶν μέσην ἀνάλογον προσευρεῖν. To find the (straight-line) in mean proportion to two
given straight-lines.†
Α Β Γ
∆
A B C
D
῎Εστωσαν αἱ δοθεῖσαι δύο εὐθεῖαι αἱ ΑΒ, ΒΓ· δεῖ δὴ τῶν Let AB and BC be the two given straight-lines. So it
ΑΒ, ΒΓ μέσην ἀνάλογον προσευρεῖν. is required to find the (straight-line) in mean proportion
Κείσθωσαν ἐπ᾿ εὐθείας, καὶ γεγράφθω ἐπὶ τῆς ΑΓ to AB and BC.
ἡμικύκλιον τὸ ΑΔΓ, καὶ ἤχθω ἀπὸ τοῦ Β σημείου τῇ ΑΓ Let (AB and BC) be laid down straight-on (with reεὐθείᾳ πρὸς ὀρθὰς ἡ ΒΑ, καὶ ἐπεζεύχθωσαν αἱ ΑΔ, ΔΓ. spect to one another), and let the semi-circle ADC have
᾿Επεὶ ἐν ἡμικυκλίῳ γωνία ἐστὶν ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΔΓ, ὀρθή ἐστιν. been drawn on AC [Prop. 1.10]. And let BD have been
καὶ ἐπεὶ ἐν ὀρθογωνίῳ τριγώνῳ τῷ ΑΔΓ ἀπὸ τῆς ὀρθῆς drawn from (point) B, at right-angles to AC [Prop. 1.11].
γωνίας ἐπὶ τὴν βάσιν κάθετος ἦκται ἡ ΔΒ, ἡ ΔΒ ἄρα τῶν And let AD and DC have been joined.
τῆς βάσεως τμημάτων τῶν ΑΒ, ΒΓ μέση ἀνάλογόν ἐστιν. And since ADC is an angle in a semi-circle, it is a
Δύο ἄρα δοθεισῶν εὐθειῶν τῶν ΑΒ, ΒΓ μέση ἀνάλογον right-angle [Prop. 3.31]. And since, in the right-angled
προσεύρηται ἡ ΔΒ· ὅπερ ἔδει ποιῆσαι. triangle ADC, the (straight-line) DB has been drawn
from the right-angle perpendicular to the base, DB is
thus the mean proportional to the pieces of the base, AB
and BC [Prop. 6.8 corr.].
Thus, DB has been found (which is) in mean proportion to the two given straight-lines, AB and BC. (Which
is) the very thing it was required to do.
†
In other words, to find the geometric mean of two given straight-lines.
idþ. Proposition 14
Τῶν ἴσων τε καὶ ἴσογωνίων παραλληλογράμμων ἀντι- In equal and equiangular parallelograms the sides
πεπόνθασιν αἱ πλευραὶ αἱ περὶ τὰς ἴσας γωνίας· καὶ ὧν ἰσο- about the equal angles are reciprocally proportional.
γωνίων παραλληλογράμμων ἀντιπεπόνθασιν αἱ πλευραὶ αἱ And those equiangular parallelograms in which the sides
περὶ τὰς ἴσας γωνίας, ἴσα ἐστὶν ἐκεῖνα. about the equal angles are reciprocally proportional are
῎Εστω ἴσα τε καὶ ἰσογώνια παραλληλόγραμμα τὰ ΑΒ, equal.
ΒΓ ἴσας ἔχοντα τὰς πρὸς τῷ Β γωνίας, καὶ κείσθωσαν ἐπ᾿ Let AB and BC be equal and equiangular paralleloεὐθείας αἱ ΔΒ, ΒΕ· ἐπ᾿ εὐθείας ἄρα εἰσὶ καὶ αἱ ΖΒ, ΒΗ. grams having the angles at B equal. And let DB and BE
λέγω, ὅτι τῶν ΑΒ, ΒΓ ἀντιπεπόνθασιν αἱ πλευραὶ αἱ περὶ be laid down straight-on (with respect to one another).
τὰς ἴσας γωνίας, τουτέστιν, ὅτι ἐστὶν ὡς ἡ ΔΒ πρὸς τὴν Thus, FB and BG are also straight-on (with respect to
ΒΕ, οὕτως ἡ ΗΒ πρὸς τὴν ΒΖ. one another) [Prop. 1.14]. I say that the sides of AB and
169
STOIQEIWN þ. ELEMENTS BOOK 6
BC about the equal angles are reciprocally proportional,
that is to say, that as DB is to BE, so GB (is) to BF.
Γ
Α
Β
Ζ Η
∆
Ε
A D
F
B
G
E C
Συμπεπληρώσθω γὰρ τὸ ΖΕ παραλληλόγραμμον. ἐπεὶ For let the parallelogram FE have been completed.
οὖν ἴσον ἐστὶ τὸ ΑΒ παραλληλόγραμμον τῷ ΒΓ παραλλη- Therefore, since parallelogram AB is equal to paralleloλογράμμῳ, ἄλλο δέ τι τὸ ΖΕ, ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς τὸ ΑΒ πρὸς τὸ gram BC, and FE (is) some other (parallelogram), thus
ΖΕ, οὕτως τὸ ΒΓ πρὸς τὸ ΖΕ. ἀλλ᾿ ὡς μὲν τὸ ΑΒ πρὸς as (parallelogram) AB is to FE, so (parallelogram) BC
τὸ ΖΕ, οὕτως ἡ ΔΒ πρὸς τὴν ΒΕ, ὡς δὲ τὸ ΒΓ πρὸς τὸ (is) to FE [Prop. 5.7]. But, as (parallelogram) AB (is) to
ΖΕ, οὕτως ἡ ΗΒ πρὸς τὴν ΒΖ· καὶ ὡς ἄρα ἡ ΔΒ πρὸς τὴν FE, so DB (is) to BE, and as (parallelogram) BC (is) to
ΒΕ, οὕτως ἡ ΗΒ πρὸς τὴν ΒΖ. τῶν ἄρα ΑΒ, ΒΓ παραλ- FE, so GB (is) to BF [Prop. 6.1]. Thus, also, as DB (is)
ληλογράμμων ἀντιπεπόνθασιν αἱ πλευραὶ αἱ περὶ τὰς ἴσας to BE, so GB (is) to BF. Thus, in parallelograms AB
γωνίας. and BC the sides about the equal angles are reciprocally
᾿Αλλὰ δὴ ἔστω ὡς ἡ ΔΒ πρὸς τὴν ΒΕ, οὕτως ἡ ΗΒ πρὸς proportional.
τὴν ΒΖ· λέγω, ὅτι ἴσον ἐστὶ τὸ ΑΒ παραλληλόγραμμον τῷ And so, let DB be to BE, as GB (is) to BF. I say that
ΒΓ παραλληλογράμμῳ. parallelogram AB is equal to parallelogram BC.
᾿Επεὶ γάρ ἐστιν ὡς ἡ ΔΒ πρὸς τὴν ΒΕ, οὕτως ἡ ΗΒ For since as DB is to BE, so GB (is) to BF, but as
πρὸς τὴν ΒΖ, ἀλλ᾿ ὡς μὲν ἡ ΔΒ πρὸς τὴν ΒΕ, οὕτως τὸ DB (is) to BE, so parallelogram AB (is) to paralleloΑΒ παραλληλόγραμμον πρὸς τὸ ΖΕ παραλληλόγραμμον, ὡς gram FE, and as GB (is) to BF, so parallelogram BC
δὲ ἡ ΗΒ πρὸς τὴν ΒΖ, οὕτως τὸ ΒΓ παραλληλόγραμμον (is) to parallelogram FE [Prop. 6.1], thus, also, as (parπρὸς τὸ ΖΕ παραλληλόγραμμον, καὶ ὡς ἄρα τὸ ΑΒ πρὸς allelogram) AB (is) to FE, so (parallelogram) BC (is)
τὸ ΖΕ, οὕτως τὸ ΒΓ πρὸς τὸ ΖΕ· ἴσον ἄρα ἐστὶ τὸ ΑΒ to FE [Prop. 5.11]. Thus, parallelogram AB is equal to
παραλληλόγραμμον τῷ ΒΓ παραλληλογράμμῳ. parallelogram BC [Prop. 5.9].
Τῶν ἄρα ἴσων τε καὶ ἰσογωνίων παραλληλογράμμων Thus, in equal and equiangular parallelograms the
ἀντιπεπόνθασιν αἱ πλευραὶ αἱ περὶ τὰς ἴσας γωνίας· καὶ ὧν sides about the equal angles are reciprocally proporἰσογωνίων παραλληλογράμμων ἀντιπεπόνθασιν αἱ πλευραὶ tional. And those equiangular parallelograms in which
αἱ περὶ τὰς ἴσας γωνίας, ἴσα ἐστὶν ἐκεῖνα· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. the sides about the equal angles are reciprocally proportional are equal. (Which is) the very thing it was required
to show.
ieþ. Proposition 15
Τῶν ἴσων καὶ μίαν μιᾷ ἴσην ἐχόντων γωνίαν τριγώνων In equal triangles also having one angle equal to one
ἀντιπεπόνθασιν αἱ πλευραὶ αἱ περὶ τὰς ἴσας γωνίας· καὶ ὧν (angle) the sides about the equal angles are reciprocally
μίαν μιᾷ ἴσην ἐχόντων γωνίαν τριγώνων ἀντιπεπόνθασιν αἱ proportional. And those triangles having one angle equal
πλευραὶ αἱ περὶ τὰς ἴσας γωνίας, ἴσα ἐστὶν ἐκεῖνα. to one angle for which the sides about the equal angles
῎Εστω ἴσα τρίγωνα τὰ ΑΒΓ, ΑΔΕ μίαν μιᾷ ἴσην ἔχοντα (are) reciprocally proportional are equal.
γωνίαν τὴν ὑπὸ ΒΑΓ τῇ ὑπὸ ΔΑΕ· λέγω, ὅτι τῶν ΑΒΓ, Let ABC and ADE be equal triangles having one anΑΔΕ τριγώνων ἀντιπεπόνθασιν αἱ πλευραὶ αἱ περὶ τὰς ἴσας gle equal to one (angle), (namely) BAC (equal) to DAE.
γωνίας, τουτέστιν, ὅτι ἐστὶν ὡς ἡ ΓΑ πρὸς τὴν ΑΔ, οὕτως I say that, in triangles ABC and ADE, the sides about the
170
STOIQEIWN þ. ELEMENTS BOOK 6
ἡ ΕΑ πρὸς τὴν ΑΒ. equal angles are reciprocally proportional, that is to say,
that as CA is to AD, so EA (is) to AB.
Γ
Ε
Α
∆
Β
A
E
C
D
B
Κείσθω γὰρ ὥστε ἐπ᾿ εὐθείας εἶναι τὴν ΓΑ τῇ ΑΔ· ἐπ᾿ For let CA be laid down so as to be straight-on (with
εὐθείας ἄρα ἐστὶ καὶ ἡ ΕΑ τῇ ΑΒ. καὶ ἐπεζεύχθω ἡ ΒΔ. respect) to AD. Thus, EA is also straight-on (with re-
᾿Επεὶ οὖν ἴσον ἐστὶ τὸ ΑΒΓ τρίγωνον τῷ ΑΔΕ τριγώνῳ, spect) to AB [Prop. 1.14]. And let BD have been joined.
ἄλλο δέ τι τὸ ΒΑΔ, ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς τὸ ΓΑΒ τρίγωνον πρὸς Therefore, since triangle ABC is equal to triangle
τὸ ΒΑΔ τρίγωνον, οὕτως τὸ ΕΑΔ τρίγωνον πρὸς τὸ ΒΑΔ ADE, and BAD (is) some other (triangle), thus as triτρίγωνον. ἀλλ᾿ ὡς μὲν τὸ ΓΑΒ πρὸς τὸ ΒΑΔ, οὕτως ἡ angle CAB is to triangle BAD, so triangle EAD (is) to
ΓΑ πρὸς τὴν ΑΔ, ὡς δὲ τὸ ΕΑΔ πρὸς τὸ ΒΑΔ, οὕτως ἡ triangle BAD [Prop. 5.7]. But, as (triangle) CAB (is)
ΕΑ πρὸς τὴν ΑΒ. καὶ ὡς ἄρα ἡ ΓΑ πρὸς τὴν ΑΔ, οὕτως to BAD, so CA (is) to AD, and as (triangle) EAD (is)
ἡ ΕΑ πρὸς τὴν ΑΒ. τῶν ΑΒΓ, ΑΔΕ ἄρα τριγώνων ἀντι- to BAD, so EA (is) to AB [Prop. 6.1]. And thus, as CA
πεπόνθασιν αἱ πλευραὶ αἱ περὶ τὰς ἴσας γωνίας. (is) to AD, so EA (is) to AB. Thus, in triangles ABC and
᾿Αλλὰ δὴ ἀντιπεπονθέτωσαν αἱ πλευραὶ τῶν ΑΒΓ, ΑΔΕ ADE the sides about the equal angles (are) reciprocally
τριγώνων, καὶ ἔστω ὡς ἡ ΓΑ πρὸς τὴν ΑΔ, οὕτως ἡ ΕΑ proportional.
πρὸς τὴν ΑΒ· λέγω, ὅτι ἴσον ἐστὶ τὸ ΑΒΓ τρίγωνον τῷ And so, let the sides of triangles ABC and ADE be
ΑΔΕ τριγώνῳ. reciprocally proportional, and (thus) let CA be to AD,
᾿Επιζευχθείσης γὰρ πάλιν τῆς ΒΔ, ἐπεί ἐστιν ὡς ἡ ΓΑ as EA (is) to AB. I say that triangle ABC is equal to
πρὸς τὴν ΑΔ, οὕτως ἡ ΕΑ πρὸς τὴν ΑΒ, ἀλλ᾿ ὡς μὲν triangle ADE.
ἡ ΓΑ πρὸς τὴν ΑΔ, οὕτως τὸ ΑΒΓ τρίγωνον πρὸς τὸ For, BD again being joined, since as CA is to AD, so
ΒΑΔ τρίγωνον, ὡς δὲ ἡ ΕΑ πρὸς τὴν ΑΒ, οὕτως τὸ ΕΑΔ EA (is) to AB, but as CA (is) to AD, so triangle ABC
τρίγωνον πρὸς τὸ ΒΑΔ τρίγωνον, ὡς ἄρα τὸ ΑΒΓ τρίγωνον (is) to triangle BAD, and as EA (is) to AB, so triangle
πρὸς τὸ ΒΑΔ τρίγωνον, οὕτως τὸ ΕΑΔ τρίγωνον πρὸς EAD (is) to triangle BAD [Prop. 6.1], thus as triangle
τὸ ΒΑΔ τρίγωνον. ἑκάτερον ἄρα τῶν ΑΒΓ, ΕΑΔ πρὸς ABC (is) to triangle BAD, so triangle EAD (is) to triτὸ ΒΑΔ τὸν αὐτὸν ἔχει λόγον. ἴσων ἄρα ἐστὶ τὸ ΑΒΓ angle BAD. Thus, (triangles) ABC and EAD each have
[τρίγωνον] τῷ ΕΑΔ τριγώνῳ. the same ratio to BAD. Thus, [triangle] ABC is equal to
Τῶν ἄρα ἴσων καὶ μίαν μιᾷ ἴσην ἐχόντων γωνίαν triangle EAD [Prop. 5.9].
τριγώνων ἀντιπεπόνθασιν αἱ πλευραὶ αἱ περὶ τὰς ἴσας Thus, in equal triangles also having one angle equal to
γωνίας· καὶ ὧς μίαν μιᾷ ἴσην ἐχόντων γωνίαν τριγώνων one (angle) the sides about the equal angles (are) recipἀντιπεπόνθασιν αἱ πλευραὶ αἱ περὶ τὰς ἴσας γωνίας, ἐκεῖνα rocally proportional. And those triangles having one anἴσα ἐστὶν· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. gle equal to one angle for which the sides about the equal
angles (are) reciprocally proportional are equal. (Which
is) the very thing it was required to show.
iþ. Proposition 16
᾿Εὰν τέσσαρες εὐθεῖαι ἀνάλογον ὦσιν, τὸ ὑπὸ τῶν If four straight-lines are proportional then the rectἄκρων περιεχόμενον ὀρθογώνιον ἴσον ἐστὶ τῷ ὑπὸ τῶν angle contained by the (two) outermost is equal to the
μέσων περιεχομένῳ ὀρθογωνίῳ· κἂν τὸ ὑπὸ τῶν ἄκρων rectangle contained by the middle (two). And if the rect171
STOIQEIWN þ. ELEMENTS BOOK 6
περιεχόμενον ὀρθογώνιον ἴσον ᾖ τῷ ὑπὸ τῶν μέσων περιε- angle contained by the (two) outermost is equal to the
χομένῳ ὀρθογωνίῳ, αἱ τέσσαρες εὐθεῖαι ἀνάλογον ἔσονται. rectangle contained by the middle (two) then the four
straight-lines will be proportional.
Η
Β ∆
Ε Ζ
Α Γ
Θ
B D
G
A
E F
C
H
῎Εστωσαν τέσσαρες εὐθεῖαι ἀνάλογον αἱ ΑΒ, ΓΔ, Ε, Ζ, Let AB, CD, E, and F be four proportional straightὡς ἡ ΑΒ πρὸς τὴν ΓΔ, οὕτως ἡ Ε πρὸς τὴν Ζ· λέγω, ὅτι lines, (such that) as AB (is) to CD, so E (is) to F. I say
τὸ ὑπὸ τῶν ΑΒ, Ζ περιεχόμενον ὀρθογώνιον ἴσον ἐστὶ τῷ that the rectangle contained by AB and F is equal to the
ὑπὸ τῶν ΓΔ, Ε περιεχομένῳ ὀρθογωνίῳ. rectangle contained by CD and E.
῎Ηχθωσαν [γὰρ] ἀπὸ τῶν Α, Γ σημείων ταῖς ΑΒ, ΓΔ [For] let AG and CH have been drawn from points
εὐθείαις πρὸς ὀρθὰς αἱ ΑΗ, ΓΘ, καὶ κείσθω τῇ μὲν Ζ ἴση A and C at right-angles to the straight-lines AB and CD
ἡ ΑΗ, τῇ δὲ Ε ἴση ἡ ΓΘ. καὶ συμπεπληρώσθω τὰ ΒΗ, ΔΘ (respectively) [Prop. 1.11]. And let AG be made equal to
παραλληλόγραμμα. F, and CH to E [Prop. 1.3]. And let the parallelograms
Καὶ ἐπεί ἐστιν ὡς ἡ ΑΒ πρὸς τὴν ΓΔ, οὕτως ἡ Ε πρὸς BG and DH have been completed.
τὴν Ζ, ἴση δὲ ἡ μὲν Ε τῇ ΓΘ, ἡ δὲ Ζ τῇ ΑΗ, ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς And since as AB is to CD, so E (is) to F, and E
ἡ ΑΒ πρὸς τὴν ΓΔ, οὕτως ἡ ΓΘ πρὸς τὴν ΑΗ. τῶν ΒΗ, (is) equal CH, and F to AG, thus as AB is to CD, so
ΔΘ ἄρα παραλληλογράμμων ἀντιπεπόνθασιν αἱ πλευραὶ αἱ CH (is) to AG. Thus, in the parallelograms BG and DH
περὶ τὰς ἴσας γωνίας. ὧν δὲ ἰσογωνίων παραλληλογράμμων the sides about the equal angles are reciprocally proporἀντιπεπόνθασιν αἱ πλευραί αἱ περὶ τὰς ἴσας γωνάις, ἴσα ἐστὶν tional. And those equiangular parallelograms in which
ἐκεῖνα· ἴσον ἄρα ἐστὶ τὸ ΒΗ παραλληλόγραμμον τῷ ΔΘ the sides about the equal angles are reciprocally proporπαραλληλογράμμῳ. καί ἐστι τὸ μὲν ΒΗ τὸ ὑπὸ τῶν ΑΒ, Ζ· tional are equal [Prop. 6.14]. Thus, parallelogram BG
ἴση γὰρ ἡ ΑΗ τῇ Ζ· τὸ δὲ ΔΘ τὸ ὑπὸ τῶν ΓΔ, Ε· ἴση γὰρ ἡ is equal to parallelogram DH. And BG is the (rectangle
Ε τῇ ΓΘ· τὸ ἄρα ὑπὸ τῶν ΑΒ, Ζ περιεχόμενον ὀρθογώνιον contained) by AB and F. For AG (is) equal to F. And
ἴσον ἐστὶ τῷ ὑπὸ τῶν ΓΔ, Ε περιεχομένῳ ὀρθογώνιῳ. DH (is) the (rectangle contained) by CD and E. For E
᾿Αλλὰ δὴ τὸ ὑπὸ τῶν ΑΒ, Ζ περιεχόμενον ὀρθογώνιον (is) equal to CH. Thus, the rectangle contained by AB
ἴσον ἔστω τῷ ὑπὸ τῶν ΓΔ, Ε περιεχομένῳ ὀρθογωνίῳ. and F is equal to the rectangle contained by CD and E.
λέγω, ὅτι αἱ τέσσαρες εὐθεῖαι ἀνάλογον ἔσονται, ὡς ἡ ΑΒ And so, let the rectangle contained by AB and F be
πρὸς τὴν ΓΔ, οὕτως ἡ Ε πρὸς τὴν Ζ. equal to the rectangle contained by CD and E. I say that
Τῶν γὰρ αὐτῶν κατασκευασθέντων, ἐπεὶ τὸ ὑπὸ τῶν the four straight-lines will be proportional, (so that) as
ΑΒ, Ζ ἴσον ἐστὶ τῷ ὑπὸ τῶν ΓΔ, Ε, καί ἐστι τὸ μὲν ὑπὸ AB (is) to CD, so E (is) to F.
τῶν ΑΒ, Ζ τὸ ΒΗ· ἴση γάρ ἐστιν ἡ ΑΗ τῇ Ζ· τὸ δὲ ὑπὸ τῶν For, with the same construction, since the (rectangle
ΓΔ, Ε τὸ ΔΘ· ἴση γὰρ ἡ ΓΘ τῇ Ε· τὸ ἄρα ΒΗ ἴσον ἐστὶ contained) by AB and F is equal to the (rectangle conτῷ ΔΘ. καί ἐστιν ἰσογώνια. τῶν δὲ ἴσων καὶ ἰσογωνίων tained) by CD and E. And BG is the (rectangle conπαραλληλογράμμων ἀντιπεπόνθασιν αἱ πλευραὶ αἱ περὶ τὰς tained) by AB and F. For AG is equal to F. And DH
ἴσας γωνίας. ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς ἡ ΑΒ πρὸς τὴν ΓΔ, οὕτως ἡ ΓΘ (is) the (rectangle contained) by CD and E. For CH
πρὸς τὴν ΑΗ. ἴση δὲ ἡ μὲν ΓΘ τῇ Ε, ἡ δὲ ΑΗ τῇ Ζ· ἔστιν (is) equal to E. BG is thus equal to DH. And they
ἄρα ὡς ἡ ΑΒ πρὸς τὴν ΓΔ, οὕτως ἡ Ε πρὸς τὴν Ζ. are equiangular. And in equal and equiangular parallel-
᾿Εὰν ἄρα τέσσαρες εὐθεῖαι ἀνάλογον ὦσιν, τὸ ὑπὸ τῶν ograms the sides about the equal angles are reciprocally
ἄκρων περιεχόμενον ὀρθογώνιον ἴσον ἐστὶ τῷ ὑπὸ τῶν proportional [Prop. 6.14]. Thus, as AB is to CD, so CH
μέσων περιεχομένῳ ὀρθογωνίῳ· κἂν τὸ ὑπὸ τῶν ἄκρων (is) to AG. And CH (is) equal to E, and AG to F. Thus,
περιεχόμενον ὀρθογώνιον ἴσον ᾖ τῷ ὑπὸ τῶν μέσων περιε- as AB is to CD, so E (is) to F.
χομένῳ ὀρθογωνίῳ, αἱ τέσσαρες εὐθεῖαι ἀνάλογον ἔσονται· Thus, if four straight-lines are proportional then the
ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. rectangle contained by the (two) outermost is equal to
the rectangle contained by the middle (two). And if the
rectangle contained by the (two) outermost is equal to
172
STOIQEIWN þ. ELEMENTS BOOK 6
the rectangle contained by the middle (two) then the four
straight-lines will be proportional. (Which is) the very
thing it was required to show.
izþ. Proposition 17
᾿Εὰν τρεῖς εὐθεῖαι ἀνάλογον ὦσιν, τὸ ὑπὸ τῶν ἄκρων If three straight-lines are proportional then the rectπεριεχόμενον ὀρθογώνιον ἴσον ἐστὶ τῷ ἀπὸ τῆς μέσης τε- angle contained by the (two) outermost is equal to the
τραγώνῳ· κἂν τὸ ὑπὸ τῶν ἄκρων περιεχόμενον ὀρθογώνιον square on the middle (one). And if the rectangle conἴσον ᾖ τῷ ἀπὸ τῆς μέσης τετραγώνῳ, αἱ τρεῖς εὐθεῖαι tained by the (two) outermost is equal to the square on
ἀνάλογον ἔσονται. the middle (one) then the three straight-lines will be proportional.
∆
Α
Β
Γ
D
A
B
C
῎Εστωσαν τρεῖς εὐθεῖαι ἀνάλογον αἱ Α, Β, Γ, ὡς ἡ Α Let A, B and C be three proportional straight-lines,
πρὸς τὴν Β, οὕτως ἡ Β πρὸς τὴν Γ· λέγω, ὅτι τὸ ὑπὸ τῶν (such that) as A (is) to B, so B (is) to C. I say that the
Α, Γ περιεχόμενον ὀρθογώνιον ἴσον ἐστὶ τῷ ἀπὸ τῆς Β rectangle contained by A and C is equal to the square on
τετραγώνῳ. B.
Κείσθω τῇ Β ἴση ἡ Δ. Let D be made equal to B [Prop. 1.3].
Καὶ ἐπεί ἐστιν ὡς ἡ Α πρὸς τὴν Β, οὕτως ἡ Β πρὸς τὴν And since as A is to B, so B (is) to C, and B (is)
Γ, ἴση δὲ ἡ Β τῇ Δ, ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς ἡ Α πρὸς τὴν Β, ἡ Δ πρὸς equal to D, thus as A is to B, (so) D (is) to C. And if
τὴν Γ. ἐὰν δὲ τέσσαρες εὐθεῖαι ἀνάλογον ὦσιν, τὸ ὑπὸ τῶν four straight-lines are proportional then the [rectangle]
ἄκρων περιεχόμενον [ὀρθογώνιον] ἴσον ἐστὶ τῷ ὑπὸ τῶν contained by the (two) outermost is equal to the rectanμέσων περιεχομένῳ ὀρθογωνίῳ. τὸ ἄρα ὑπὸ τῶν Α, Γ ἴσον gle contained by the middle (two) [Prop. 6.16]. Thus,
ἐστὶ τῷ ὑπὸ τῶν Β, Δ. ἀλλὰ τὸ ὑπὸ τῶν Β, Δ τὸ ἀπὸ τῆς Β the (rectangle contained) by A and C is equal to the
ἐστιν· ἴση γὰρ ἡ Β τῇ Δ· τὸ ἄρα ὑπὸ τῶν Α, Γ περιεχόμενον (rectangle contained) by B and D. But, the (rectangle
ὀρθογώνιον ἴσον ἐστὶ τῷ ἀπὸ τῆς Β τετραγώνῳ. contained) by B and D is the (square) on B. For B (is)
᾿Αλλὰ δὴ τὸ ὑπὸ τῶν Α, Γ ἴσον ἔστω τῷ ἀπὸ τῆς Β· equal to D. Thus, the rectangle contained by A and C is
λέγω, ὅτι ἐστὶν ὡς ἡ Α πρὸς τὴν Β, οὕτως ἡ Β πρὸς τὴν Γ. equal to the square on B.
Τῶν γὰρ αὐτῶν κατασκευασθέντων, ἐπεὶ τὸ ὑπὸ τῶν Α, And so, let the (rectangle contained) by A and C be
Γ ἴσον ἐστὶ τῷ ἀπὸ τῆς Β, ἀλλὰ τὸ ἀπὸ τῆς Β τὸ ὑπὸ τῶν equal to the (square) on B. I say that as A is to B, so B
Β, Δ ἐστιν· ἴση γὰρ ἡ Β τῇ Δ· τὸ ἄρα ὑπὸ τῶν Α, Γ ἴσον (is) to C.
ἐστὶ τῷ ὑπὸ τῶν Β, Δ. ἐὰν δὲ τὸ ὑπὸ τῶν ἄκρων ἴσον ᾖ τῷ For, with the same construction, since the (rectangle
ὑπὸ τῶν μέσων, αἱ τέσσαρες εὐθεῖαι ἀνάλογόν εἰσιν. ἔστιν contained) by A and C is equal to the (square) on B.
ἄρα ὡς ἡ Α πρὸς τὴν Β, οὕτως ἡ Δ πρὸς τὴν Γ. ἴση δὲ ἡ Β But, the (square) on B is the (rectangle contained) by B
τῇ Δ· ὡς ἄρα ἡ Α πρὸς τὴν Β, οὕτως ἡ Β πρὸς τὴν Γ. and D. For B (is) equal to D. The (rectangle contained)
᾿Εὰν ἄρα τρεῖς εὐθεῖαι ἀνάλογον ὦσιν, τὸ ὑπὸ τῶν ἄκρων by A and C is thus equal to the (rectangle contained) by
περιεχόμενον ὀρθογώνιον ἴσον ἐστὶ τῷ ἀπὸ τῆς μέσης τε- B and D. And if the (rectangle contained) by the (two)
τραγώνῳ· κἂν τὸ ὑπὸ τῶν ἄκρων περιεχόμενον ὀρθογώνιον outermost is equal to the (rectangle contained) by the
ἴσον ᾖ τῷ ἀπὸ τῆς μέσης τετραγώνῳ, αἱ τρεῖς εὐθεῖαι middle (two) then the four straight-lines are proportional
ἀνάλογον ἔσονται· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. [Prop. 6.16]. Thus, as A is to B, so D (is) to C. And B
(is) equal to D. Thus, as A (is) to B, so B (is) to C.
Thus, if three straight-lines are proportional then the
rectangle contained by the (two) outermost is equal to
the square on the middle (one). And if the rectangle contained by the (two) outermost is equal to the square on
the middle (one) then the three straight-lines will be proportional. (Which is) the very thing it was required to
173
STOIQEIWN þ. ELEMENTS BOOK 6
show.
ihþ. Proposition 18
᾿Απὸ τῆς δοθείσης εὐθείας τῷ δοθέντι εὐθυγράμμῳ To describe a rectilinear figure similar, and simiὅμοιόν τε καὶ ὁμοίως κείμενον εὐθύγραμμον ἀναγράψαι. larly laid down, to a given rectilinear figure on a given
straight-line.
Η
Ε
∆
Θ
Β
Ζ
Γ Α
G
C
E
D
H
A B
F
῎Εστω ἡ μὲν δοθεῖσα εὐθεῖα ἡ ΑΒ, τὸ δὲ δοθὲν Let AB be the given straight-line, and CE the given
εὐθύγραμμον τὸ ΓΕ· δεῖ δὴ ἀπὸ τῆς ΑΒ εὐθείας τῷ ΓΕ rectilinear figure. So it is required to describe a rectilinear
εὐθυγράμμῳ ὅμοιόν τε καὶ ὁμοίως κείμενον εὐθύγραμμον figure similar, and similarly laid down, to the rectilinear
ἀναγράψαι. figure CE on the straight-line AB.
᾿Επεζεύχθω ἡ ΔΖ, καὶ συνεστάτω πρὸς τῇ ΑΒ εὐθείᾳ Let DF have been joined, and let GAB, equal to the
καὶ τοῖς πρὸς αὐτῇ σημείοις τοῖς Α, Β τῇ μὲν πρὸς τῷ Γ angle at C, and ABG, equal to (angle) CDF, have been
γωνίᾳ ἴση ἡ ὑπὸ ΗΑΒ, τῇ δὲ ὑπὸ ΓΔΖ ἴση ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΒΗ. λοιπὴ constructed on the straight-line AB at the points A and
ἄρα ἡ ὑπὸ ΓΖΔ τῇ ὑπὸ ΑΗΒ ἐστιν ἴση· ἰσογώνιον ἄρα ἐστὶ B on it (respectively) [Prop. 1.23]. Thus, the remainτὸ ΖΓΔ τρίγωνον τῷ ΗΑΒ τριγώνῳ. ἀνάλογον ἄρα ἐστὶν ing (angle) CFD is equal to AGB [Prop. 1.32]. Thus,
ὡς ἡ ΖΔ πρὸς τὴν ΗΒ, οὕτως ἡ ΖΓ πρὸς τὴν ΗΑ, καὶ ἡ triangle FCD is equiangular to triangle GAB. Thus,
ΓΔ πρὸς τὴν ΑΒ. πάλιν συνεστάτω πρὸς τῇ ΒΗ εὐθείᾳ καὶ proportionally, as FD is to GB, so FC (is) to GA, and
τοῖς πρὸς αὐτῇ σημείοις τοῖς Β, Η τῇ μὲν ὑπὸ ΔΖΕ γωνίᾳ CD to AB [Prop. 6.4]. Again, let BGH, equal to anἴση ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΗΘ, τῇ δὲ ὑπὸ ΖΔΕ ἴση ἡ ὑπὸ ΗΒΘ. λοιπὴ ἄρα gle DFE, and GBH equal to (angle) FDE, have been
ἡ πρὸς τῷ Ε λοιπῇ τῇ πρὸς τῷ Θ ἐστιν ἴση· ἰσογώνιον ἄρα constructed on the straight-line BG at the points G and
ἐστὶ τὸ ΖΔΕ τρίγωνον τῷ ΗΘΒ τριγώνῳ· ἀνάλογον ἄρα B on it (respectively) [Prop. 1.23]. Thus, the remainἐστὶν ὡς ἡ ΖΔ πρὸς τὴν ΗΒ, οὕτως ἡ ΖΕ πρὸς τὴν ΗΘ καὶ ing (angle) at E is equal to the remaining (angle) at H
ἡ ΕΔ πρὸς τὴν ΘΒ. ἐδείχθη δὲ καὶ ὡς ἡ ΖΔ πρὸς τὴν ΗΒ, [Prop. 1.32]. Thus, triangle FDE is equiangular to triοὕτως ἡ ΖΓ πρὸς τὴν ΗΑ καὶ ἡ ΓΔ πρὸς τὴν ΑΒ· καὶ ὡς angle GHB. Thus, proportionally, as FD is to GB, so
ἄρα ἡ ΖΓ πρὸς τὴν ΑΗ, οὕτως ἥ τε ΓΔ πρὸς τὴν ΑΒ καὶ ἡ FE (is) to GH, and ED to HB [Prop. 6.4]. And it was
ΖΕ πρὸς τὴν ΗΘ καὶ ἔτι ἡ ΕΑ πρὸς τὴν ΘΒ. καὶ ἐπεὶ ἴση also shown (that) as FD (is) to GB, so FC (is) to GA,
ἐστὶν ἡ μὲν ὑπὸ ΓΖΔ γωνία τῇ ὑπὸ ΑΗΒ, ἡ δὲ ὑπὸ ΔΖΕ τῇ and CD to AB. Thus, also, as FC (is) to AG, so CD (is)
ὑπὸ ΒΗΘ, ὅλη ἄρα ἡ ὑπὸ ΓΖΕ ὅλῃ τῇ ὑπὸ ΑΗΘ ἐστιν ἴση. to AB, and FE to GH, and, further, ED to HB. And
διὰ τὰ αὐτὰ δὴ καὶ ἡ ὑπὸ ΓΔΕ τῇ ὑπὸ ΑΒΘ ἐστιν ἴση. ἔστι since angle CFD is equal to AGB, and DFE to BGH,
δὲ καὶ ἡ μὲν πρὸς τῷ Γ τῇ πρὸς τῷ Α ἴση, ἡ δὲ πρὸς τῷ Ε thus the whole (angle) CFE is equal to the whole (anτῇ πρὸς τῷ Θ. ἰσογώνιον ἄρα ἐστὶ τὸ ΑΘ τῷ ΓΕ· καὶ τὰς gle) AGH. So, for the same (reasons), (angle) CDE is
περὶ τὰς ἴσας γωνίας αὐτῶν πλευρὰς ἀνάλογον ἔχει· ὅμοιον also equal to ABH. And the (angle) at C is also equal
ἄρα ἐστὶ τὸ ΑΘ εὐθύγραμμον τῷ ΓΕ εὐθυγράμμῳ. to the (angle) at A, and the (angle) at E to the (angle)
᾿Απὸ τῆς δοθείσης ἄρα εὐθείας τῆς ΑΒ τῷ δοθέντι at H. Thus, (figure) AH is equiangular to CE. And (the
εὐθυγράμμῳ τῷ ΓΕ ὅμοιόν τε καὶ ὁμοίως κείμενον εὐθύγρα- two figures) have the sides about their equal angles proμμον ἀναγέγραπται τὸ ΑΘ· ὅπερ ἔδει ποιῆσαι. portional. Thus, the rectilinear figure AH is similar to the
rectilinear figure CE [Def. 6.1].
Thus, the rectilinear figure AH, similar, and similarly
laid down, to the given rectilinear figure CE has been
constructed on the given straight-line AB. (Which is) the
174
STOIQEIWN þ. ELEMENTS BOOK 6
very thing it was required to do.
ijþ. Proposition 19
Τὰ ὅμοια τρίγωνα πρὸς ἄλληλα ἐν διπλασίονι λόγῳ ἐστὶ Similar triangles are to one another in the squared†
τῶν ὁμολόγων πλευρῶν. ratio of (their) corresponding sides.
Β Η Γ
Α
Ζ
∆
Ε G C E
A
D
B F
῎Εστω ὅμοια τρίγωνα τὰ ΑΒΓ, ΔΕΖ ἴσην ἔχοντα τὴν Let ABC and DEF be similar triangles having the
πρὸς τῷ Β γωνίαν τῇ πρὸς τῷ Ε, ὡς δὲ τὴν ΑΒ πρὸς τὴν ΒΓ, angle at B equal to the (angle) at E, and AB to BC, as
οὕτως τὴν ΔΕ πρὸς τὴν ΕΖ, ὥστε ὁμόλογον εἶναι τὴν ΒΓ DE (is) to EF, such that BC corresponds to EF. I say
τῇ ΕΖ· λέγω, ὅτι τὸ ΑΒΓ τρίγωνον πρὸς τὸ ΔΕΖ τρίγωνον that triangle ABC has a squared ratio to triangle DEF
διπλασίονα λόγον ἔχει ἤπερ ἡ ΒΓ πρὸς τὴν ΕΖ. with respect to (that side) BC (has) to EF.
Εἰλήφθω γὰρ τῶν ΒΓ, ΕΖ τρίτη ἀνάλογον ἡ ΒΗ, ὥστε For let a third (straight-line), BG, have been taken
εἶναι ὡς τὴν ΒΓ πρὸς τὴν ΕΖ, οὕτως τὴν ΕΖ πρὸς τὴν ΒΗ· (which is) proportional to BC and EF, so that as BC
καὶ ἐπεζεύχθω ἡ ΑΗ. (is) to EF, so EF (is) to BG [Prop. 6.11]. And let AG
᾿Επεὶ οὖν ἐστιν ὡς ἡ ΑΒ πρὸς τὴν ΒΓ, οὕτως ἡ ΔΕ πρὸς have been joined.
τὴν ΕΖ, ἐναλλὰξ ἄρα ἐστὶν ὡς ἡ ΑΒ πρὸς τὴν ΔΕ, οὕτως ἡ Therefore, since as AB is to BC, so DE (is) to EF,
ΒΓ πρὸς τὴν ΕΖ. ἀλλ᾿ ὡς ἡ ΒΓ πρὸς ΕΖ, οὕτως ἐστιν ἡ ΕΖ thus, alternately, as AB is to DE, so BC (is) to EF
πρὸς ΒΗ. καὶ ὡς ἄρα ἡ ΑΒ πρὸς ΔΕ, οὕτως ἡ ΕΖ πρὸς ΒΗ· [Prop. 5.16]. But, as BC (is) to EF, so EF is to BG.
τῶν ΑΒΗ, ΔΕΖ ἄρα τριγώνων ἀντιπεπόνθασιν αἱ πλευραὶ αἱ And, thus, as AB (is) to DE, so EF (is) to BG. Thus,
περὶ τὰς ἴσας γωνάις. ὧν δὲ μίαν μιᾷ ἴσην ἐχόντων γωνίαν for triangles ABG and DEF, the sides about the equal
τριγώνων ἀντιπεπόνθασιν αἱ πλευραὶ αἱ περὶ τὰς ἴσας γωνάις, angles are reciprocally proportional. And those triangles
ἴσα ἐστὶν ἐκεῖνα. ἴσον ἄρα ἐστὶ τὸ ΑΒΗ τρίγωνον τῷ ΔΕΖ having one (angle) equal to one (angle) for which the
τριγώνῳ. καὶ ἐπεί ἐστιν ὡς ἡ ΒΓ πρὸς τὴν ΕΖ, οὕτως ἡ sides about the equal angles are reciprocally proportional
ΕΖ πρὸς τὴν ΒΗ, ἐὰν δὲ τρεῖς εὐθεῖαι ἀνάλογον ὦσιν, ἡ are equal [Prop. 6.15]. Thus, triangle ABG is equal to
πρώτη πρὸς τὴν τρίτην διπλασίονα λόγον ἔχει ἤπερ πρὸς triangle DEF. And since as BC (is) to EF, so EF (is)
τὴν δευτέραν, ἡ ΒΓ ἄρα πρὸς τὴν ΒΗ διπλασίονα λόγον to BG, and if three straight-lines are proportional then
ἔχει ἤπερ ἡ ΓΒ πρὸς τὴν ΕΖ. ὡς δὲ ἡ ΓΒ πρὸς τὴν ΒΗ, the first has a squared ratio to the third with respect to
οὕτως τὸ ΑΒΓ τρίγωνον πρὸς τὸ ΑΒΗ τρίγωνον· καὶ τὸ the second [Def. 5.9], BC thus has a squared ratio to BG
ΑΒΓ ἄρα τρίγωνον πρὸς τὸ ΑΒΗ διπλασίονα λόγον ἔχει with respect to (that) CB (has) to EF. And as CB (is)
ἤπερ ἡ ΒΓ πρὸς τὴν ΕΖ. ἴσον δὲ τὸ ΑΒΗ τρίγωνον τῷ to BG, so triangle ABC (is) to triangle ABG [Prop. 6.1].
ΔΕΖ τριγώνῳ. καὶ τὸ ΑΒΓ ἄρα τρίγωνον πρὸς τὸ ΔΕΖ Thus, triangle ABC also has a squared ratio to (triangle)
τρίγωνον διπλασίονα λόγον ἔχει ἤπερ ἡ ΒΓ πρὸς τὴν ΕΖ. ABG with respect to (that side) BC (has) to EF. And
Τὰ ἄρα ὅμοια τρίγωνα πρὸς ἄλληλα ἐν διπλασίονι λόγῳ triangle ABG (is) equal to triangle DEF. Thus, trianἐστὶ τῶν ὁμολόγων πλευρῶν. [ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι.] gle ABC also has a squared ratio to triangle DEF with
respect to (that side) BC (has) to EF.
Thus, similar triangles are to one another in the
squared ratio of (their) corresponding sides. [(Which
is) the very thing it was required to show].
Pìrisma. Corollary
᾿Εκ δὴ τούτου φανερόν, ὅτι, ἐὰν τρεῖς εὐθεῖαι ἀνάλογον So it is clear, from this, that if three straight-lines are
ὦσιν, ἔστιν ὡς ἡ πρώτη πρὸς τὴν τρίτην, οὕτως τὸ ἀπὸ proportional, then as the first is to the third, so the figure
175
STOIQEIWN þ. ELEMENTS BOOK 6
τῆς πρώτης εἶδος πρὸς τὸ ἀπὸ τῆς δευτέρας τὸ ὅμοιον καὶ (described) on the first (is) to the similar, and similarly
ὁμοίως ἀναγραφόμενον. ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. described, (figure) on the second. (Which is) the very
thing it was required to show.
† Literally, “double”.
kþ. Proposition 20
Τὰ ὅμοια πολύγωνα εἴς τε ὅμοια τρίγωνα διαιρεῖται καὶ Similar polygons can be divided into equal numbers
εἰς ἴσα τὸ πλῆθος καὶ ὁμόλογα τοῖς ὅλοις, καὶ τὸ πολύγωνον of similar triangles corresponding (in proportion) to the
πρὸς τὸ πολύγωνον διπλασίονα λόγον ἔχει ἤπερ ἡ ὁμόλογος wholes, and one polygon has to the (other) polygon a
πλευρὰ πρὸς τὴν ὁμόλογον πλευράν. squared ratio with respect to (that) a corresponding side
(has) to a corresponding side.
Κ
Γ
Μ
Α
Ζ
Θ
Β Η
Λ
Ν
Ε
∆
L B
A
M
E
C
F
N
H
D
K
G
῎Εστω ὅμοια πολύγωνα τὰ ΑΒΓΔΕ, ΖΗΘΚΛ, ὁμόλογος Let ABCDE and FGHKL be similar polygons, and
δὲ ἔστω ἡ ΑΒ τῇ ΖΗ· λέγω, ὅτι τὰ ΑΒΓΔΕ, ΖΗΘΚΛ let AB correspond to FG. I say that polygons ABCDE
πολύγωνα εἴς τε ὅμοια τρίγωνα διαιρεῖται καὶ εἰς ἴσα τὸ and FGHKL can be divided into equal numbers of simiπλῆθος καὶ ὁμόλογα τοῖς ὅλοις, καὶ τὸ ΑΒΓΔΕ πολύγωνον lar triangles corresponding (in proportion) to the wholes,
πρὸς τὸ ΖΗΘΚΛ πολύγωνον διπλασίονα λόγον ἔχει ἤπερ ἡ and (that) polygon ABCDE has a squared ratio to polyΑΒ πρὸς τὴν ΖΗ. gon FGHKL with respect to that AB (has) to FG.
᾿Επεζεύχθωσαν αἱ ΒΕ, ΕΓ, ΗΛ, ΛΘ. Let BE, EC, GL, and LH have been joined.
Καὶ ἐπεὶ ὅμοιόν ἐστι τὸ ΑΒΓΔΕ πολύγωνον τῷ And since polygon ABCDE is similar to polygon
ΖΗΘΚΛ πολυγώνῳ, ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΑΕ γωνία τῇ ὑπὸ FGHKL, angle BAE is equal to angle GFL, and as BA
ΗΖΛ. καί ἐστιν ὡς ἡ ΒΑ πρὸς ΑΕ, οὕτως ἡ ΗΖ πρὸς ΖΛ. is to AE, so GF (is) to FL [Def. 6.1]. Therefore, since
ἐπεὶ οὖν δύο τρίγωνά ἐστι τὰ ΑΒΕ, ΖΗΛ μίαν γωνίαν μιᾷ ABE and FGL are two triangles having one angle equal
γωνίᾳ ἴσην ἔχοντα, περὶ δὲ τὰς ἴσας γωνίας τὰς πλευρὰς to one angle and the sides about the equal angles proporἀνάλογον, ἰσογώνιον ἄρα ἐστὶ τὸ ΑΒΕ τρίγωνον τῷ ΖΗΛ tional, triangle ABE is thus equiangular to triangle FGL
τριγώνῳ· ὥστε καὶ ὅμοιον· ἴση ἄρα ἐστὶν ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΒΕ γωνία [Prop. 6.6]. Hence, (they are) also similar [Prop. 6.4,
τῇ ὑπὸ ΖΗΛ. ἔστι δὲ καὶ ὅλη ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΒΓ ὅλῃ τῇ ὑπὸ Def. 6.1]. Thus, angle ABE is equal to (angle) FGL.
ΖΗΘ ἴση διὰ τὴν ὁμοιότητα τῶν πολυγώνων· λοιπὴ ἄρα ἡ And the whole (angle) ABC is equal to the whole (angle)
ὑπὸ ΕΒΓ γωνία τῇ ὑπὸ ΛΗΘ ἐστιν ἴση. καὶ ἐπεὶ διὰ τὴν FGH, on account of the similarity of the polygons. Thus,
ὁμοιότητα τῶν ΑΒΕ, ΖΗΛ τριγώνων ἐστὶν ὡς ἡ ΕΒ πρὸς the remaining angle EBC is equal to LGH. And since,
ΒΑ, οὕτως ἡ ΛΗ πρὸς ΗΖ, ἀλλὰ μὴν καὶ διὰ τὴν ὁμοιότητα on account of the similarity of triangles ABE and FGL,
τῶν πολυγώνων ἐστὶν ὡς ἡ ΑΒ πρὸς ΒΓ, οὕτως ἡ ΖΗ πρὸς as EB is to BA, so LG (is) to GF, but also, on account of
ΗΘ, δι᾿ ἴσου ἄρα ἐστὶν ὡς ἡ ΕΒ πρὸς ΒΓ, οὕτως ἡ ΛΗ πρὸς the similarity of the polygons, as AB is to BC, so FG (is)
ΗΘ, καὶ περὶ τὰς ἴσας γωνάις τὰς ὑπὸ ΕΒΓ, ΛΗΘ αἱ πλευραὶ to GH, thus, via equality, as EB is to BC, so LG (is) to
ἀνάλογόν εἰσιν· ἰσογώνιον ἄρα ἐστὶ τὸ ΕΒΓ τρίγωνον τῷ GH [Prop. 5.22], and the sides about the equal angles,
ΛΗΘ τριγώνῳ· ὥστε καὶ ὅμοιόν ἐστι τὸ ΕΒΓ τρίγωνον EBC and LGH, are proportional. Thus, triangle EBC is
τῷ ΛΗΘ τριγώνω. διὰ τὰ αὐτὰ δὴ καὶ τὸ ΕΓΔ τρίγωνον equiangular to triangle LGH [Prop. 6.6]. Hence, triangle
ὅμοιόν ἐστι τῷ ΛΘΚ τριγώνῳ. τὰ ἄρα ὅμοια πολύγωνα τὰ EBC is also similar to triangle LGH [Prop. 6.4, Def. 6.1].
ΑΒΓΔΕ, ΖΗΘΚΛ εἴς τε ὅμοια τρίγωνα διῄρηται καὶ εἰς ἴσα So, for the same (reasons), triangle ECD is also similar
176
STOIQEIWN þ. ELEMENTS BOOK 6
τὸ πλῆθος. to triangle LHK. Thus, the similar polygons ABCDE
Λέγω, ὅτι καὶ ὁμόλογα τοῖς ὅλοις, τουτέστιν ὥστε and FGHKL have been divided into equal numbers of
ἀνάλογον εἶναι τὰ τρίγωνα, καὶ ἡγούμενα μὲν εἶναι τὰ ΑΒΕ, similar triangles.
ΕΒΓ, ΕΓΔ, ἑπόμενα δὲ αὐτῶν τὰ ΖΗΛ, ΛΗΘ, ΛΘΚ, καὶ I also say that (the triangles) correspond (in proporὅτι τὸ ΑΒΓΔΕ πολύγωνον πρὸς τὸ ΖΗΘΚΛ πολύγωνον tion) to the wholes. That is to say, the triangles are
διπλασίονα λόγον ἔχει ἤπερ ἡ ὁμόλογος πλευρὰ πρὸς τὴν proportional: ABE, EBC, and ECD are the leading
ὁμόλογον πλευράν, τουτέστιν ἡ ΑΒ πρὸς τὴν ΖΗ. (magnitudes), and their (associated) following (magni-
᾿Επεζεύχθωσαν γὰρ αἱ ΑΓ, ΖΘ. καὶ ἐπεὶ διὰ τὴν tudes are) FGL, LGH, and LHK (respectively). (I) also
ὁμοιότητα τῶν πολυγώνων ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΒΓ γωνία τῇ (say) that polygon ABCDE has a squared ratio to polyὑπὸ ΖΗΘ, καί ἐστιν ὡς ἡ ΑΒ πρὸς ΒΓ, οὕτως ἡ ΖΗ πρὸς gon FGHKL with respect to (that) a corresponding side
ΗΘ, ἰσογώνιόν ἐστι τὸ ΑΒΓ τρίγωνον τῷ ΖΗΘ τριγώνῳ· (has) to a corresponding side—that is to say, (side) AB
ἴση ἄρα ἐστὶν ἡ μὲν ὑπὸ ΒΑΓ γωνία τῇ ὑπὸ ΗΖΘ, ἡ δὲ ὑπὸ to FG.
ΒΓΑ τῇ ὑπὸ ΗΘΖ. καὶ ἐπεὶ ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΑΜ γωνία For let AC and FH have been joined. And since angle
τῇ ὑπὸ ΗΖΝ, ἔστι δὲ καὶ ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΒΜ τῇ ὑπὸ ΖΗΝ ἴση, ABC is equal to FGH, and as AB is to BC, so FG (is) to
καὶ λοιπὴ ἄρα ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΜΒ λοιπῇ τῇ ὑπὸ ΖΝΗ ἴση ἐστίν· GH, on account of the similarity of the polygons, triangle
ἰσογώνιον ἄρα ἐστὶ τὸ ΑΒΜ τρίγωνον τῷ ΖΗΝ τριγώνῳ. ABC is equiangular to triangle FGH [Prop. 6.6]. Thus,
ὁμοίως δὴ δεῖξομεν, ὅτι καὶ τὸ ΒΜΓ τρίγωνον ἰσογώνιόν angle BAC is equal to GFH, and (angle) BCA to GHF.
ἐστι τῷ ΗΝΘ τριγώνῳ. ἀνάλογον ἄρα ἐστίν, ὡς μὲν ἡ ΑΜ And since angle BAM is equal to GFN, and (angle)
πρὸς ΜΒ, οὕτως ἡ ΖΝ πρὸς ΝΗ, ὡς δὲ ἡ ΒΜ πρὸς ΜΓ, ABM is also equal to FGN (see earlier), the remaining
οὕτως ἡ ΗΝ πρὸς ΝΘ· ὥστε καὶ δι᾿ ἴσου, ὡς ἡ ΑΜ πρὸς (angle) AMB is thus also equal to the remaining (angle)
ΜΓ, οὕτως ἡ ΖΝ πρὸς ΝΘ. ἀλλ᾿ ὡς ἡ ΑΜ πρὸς ΜΓ, οὕτως FNG [Prop. 1.32]. Thus, triangle ABM is equiangular
τὸ ΑΒΜ [τρίγωνον] πρὸς τὸ ΜΒΓ, καὶ τὸ ΑΜΕ πρὸς τὸ to triangle FGN. So, similarly, we can show that triangle
ΕΜΓ· πρὸς ἄλληλα γάρ εἰσιν ὡς αἱ βάσεις. καὶ ὡς ἄρα BMC is also equiangular to triangle GNH. Thus, proἓν τῶν ἡγουμένων πρὸς ἓν τῶν ἑπόμενων, οὕτως ἅπαντα portionally, as AM is to MB, so FN (is) to NG, and as
τὰ ἡγούμενα πρὸς ἅπαντα τὰ ἑπόμενα· ὡς ἄρα τὸ ΑΜΒ BM (is) to MC, so GN (is) to NH [Prop. 6.4]. Hence,
τρίγωνον πρὸς τὸ ΒΜΓ, οὕτως τὸ ΑΒΕ πρὸς τὸ ΓΒΕ. αλλ᾿ also, via equality, as AM (is) to MC, so FN (is) to NH
ὡς τὸ ΑΜΒ πρὸς τὸ ΒΜΓ, οὕτως ἡ ΑΜ πρὸς ΜΓ· καὶ [Prop. 5.22]. But, as AM (is) to MC, so [triangle] ABM
ὡς ἄρα ἡ ΑΜ πρὸς ΜΓ, οὕτως τὸ ΑΒΕ τρίγωνον πρὸς τὸ is to MBC, and AME to EMC. For they are to one anΕΒΓ τρίγωνον. διὰ τὰ αὐτὰ δὴ καὶ ὡς ἡ ΖΝ πρὸς ΝΘ, other as their bases [Prop. 6.1]. And as one of the leading
οὕτως τὸ ΖΗΛ τρίγωνον πρὸς τὸ ΗΛΘ τρίγωνον. καί ἐστιν (magnitudes) is to one of the following (magnitudes), so
ὡς ἡ ΑΜ πρὸς ΜΓ, οὕτως ἡ ΖΝ πρὸς ΝΘ· καὶ ὡς ἄρα (the sum of) all the leading (magnitudes) is to (the sum
τὸ ΑΒΕ τρίγωνον πρὸς τὸ ΒΕΓ τρίγωνον, οὕτως τὸ ΖΗΛ of) all the following (magnitudes) [Prop. 5.12]. Thus, as
τρίγωνον πρὸς τὸ ΗΛΘ τρίγωνον, καὶ ἐναλλὰξ ὡς τὸ ΑΒΕ triangle AMB (is) to BMC, so (triangle) ABE (is) to
τρίγωνον πρὸς τὸ ΖΗΛ τρίγωνον, οὕτως τὸ ΒΕΓ τρίγωνον CBE. But, as (triangle) AMB (is) to BMC, so AM (is)
πρὸς τὸ ΗΛΘ τρίγωνον. ὁμοίως δὴ δείξομεν ἐπιζευχθεισῶν to MC. Thus, also, as AM (is) to MC, so triangle ABE
τῶν ΒΔ, ΗΚ, ὅτι καὶ ὡς τὸ ΒΕΓ τρίγωνον πρὸς τὸ ΛΗΘ (is) to triangle EBC. And so, for the same (reasons), as
τρίγωνον, οὕτως τὸ ΕΓΔ τρίγωνον πρὸς τὸ ΛΘΚ τρίγωνον. FN (is) to NH, so triangle FGL (is) to triangle GLH.
καὶ ἐπεί ἐστιν ὡς τὸ ΑΒΕ τρίγωνον πρὸς τὸ ΖΗΛ τρίγωνον, And as AM is to MC, so FN (is) to NH. Thus, also, as
οὕτως τὸ ΕΒΓ πρὸς τὸ ΛΗΘ, καὶ ἔτι τὸ ΕΓΔ πρὸς τὸ ΛΘΚ, triangle ABE (is) to triangle BEC, so triangle FGL (is)
καὶ ὡς ἄρα ἓν τῶν ἡγουμένων πρὸς ἓν τῶν ἑπομένων, οὕτως to triangle GLH, and, alternately, as triangle ABE (is)
ἅπαντα τὰ ἡγούμενα πρὸς ἅπαντα τὰ ἑπόμενα· ἔστιν ἄρα to triangle FGL, so triangle BEC (is) to triangle GLH
ὡς τὸ ΑΒΕ τρίγωνον πρὸς τὸ ΖΗΛ τρίγωνον, οὕτως τὸ [Prop. 5.16]. So, similarly, we can also show, by joining
ΑΒΓΔΕ πολύγωνον πρὸς τὸ ΖΗΘΚΛ πολύγωνον. ἀλλὰ τὸ BD and GK, that as triangle BEC (is) to triangle LGH,
ΑΒΕ τρίγωνον πρὸς τὸ ΖΗΛ τρίγωνον διπλασίονα λόγον so triangle ECD (is) to triangle LHK. And since as triἔχει ἤπερ ἡ ΑΒ ὁμόλογος πλευρὰ πρὸς τὴν ΖΗ ὁμόλογον angle ABE is to triangle FGL, so (triangle) EBC (is)
πλευράν· τὰ γὰρ ὅμοια τρίγωνα ἐν διπλασίονι λόγῳ ἐστὶ to LGH, and, further, (triangle) ECD to LHK, and also
τῶν ὁμολόγων πλευρῶν. καὶ τὸ ΑΒΓΔΕ ἄρα πολύγωνον as one of the leading (magnitudes is) to one of the folπρὸς τὸ ΖΗΘΚΛ πολύγωνον διπλασίονα λόγον ἔχει ἤπερ ἡ lowing, so (the sum of) all the leading (magnitudes is) to
ΑΒ ὁμόλογος πλευρὰ πρὸς τὴν ΖΗ ὁμόλογον πλευράν. (the sum of) all the following [Prop. 5.12], thus as trianΤὰ ἄρα ὅμοια πολύγωνα εἴς τε ὅμοια τρίγωνα διαιρεῖται gle ABE is to triangle FGL, so polygon ABCDE (is) to
καὶ εἰς ἴσα τὸ πλῆθος καὶ ὁμόλογα τοῖς ὅλοις, καὶ τὸ polygon FGHKL. But, triangle ABE has a squared ratio
177
STOIQEIWN þ. ELEMENTS BOOK 6
πολύγωνον πρὸς τὸ πολύγωνον διπλασίονα λόγον ἔχει ἤπερ to triangle FGL with respect to (that) the corresponding
ἡ ὁμόλογος πλευρὰ πρὸς τὴν ὁμόλογον πλευράν [ὅπερ ἔδει side AB (has) to the corresponding side FG. For, similar
δεῖξαι]. triangles are in the squared ratio of corresponding sides
[Prop. 6.14]. Thus, polygon ABCDE also has a squared
ratio to polygon FGHKL with respect to (that) the corresponding side AB (has) to the corresponding side FG.
Thus, similar polygons can be divided into equal numbers of similar triangles corresponding (in proportion) to
the wholes, and one polygon has to the (other) polygon a
squared ratio with respect to (that) a corresponding side
(has) to a corresponding side. [(Which is) the very thing
it was required to show].
Pìrisma. Corollary
῾Ωσαύτως δὲ καὶ ἐπὶ τῶν [ὁμοίων] τετραπλεύρων δειχθή- And, in the same manner, it can also be shown for
σεται, ὅτι ἐν διπλασίονι λόγῳ εἰσὶ τῶν ὁμολόγων πλευρῶν. [similar] quadrilaterals that they are in the squared ratio
ἐδείχθη δὲ καὶ ἐπὶ τῶν τριγώνων· ὥστε καὶ καθόλου τὰ of (their) corresponding sides. And it was also shown for
ὅμοια εὐθύγραμμα σχήματα πρὸς ἄλληλα ἐν διπλασίονι triangles. Hence, in general, similar rectilinear figures are
λόγῳ εἰσὶ τῶν ὁμολόγων πλευρῶν. ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. also to one another in the squared ratio of (their) corresponding sides. (Which is) the very thing it was required
to show.
kaþ. Proposition 21
Τὰ τῷ αὐτῷ εὐθυγράμμῳ ὅμοια καὶ ἀλλήλοις ἐστὶν (Rectilinear figures) similar to the same rectilinear figὅμοια. ure are also similar to one another.
Α Β
Γ
A
B
C
῎Εστω γὰρ ἑκάτερον τῶν Α, Β εὐθυγράμμων τῷ Γ Let each of the rectilinear figures A and B be similar
ὅμοιον· λέγω, ὅτι καὶ τὸ Α τῷ Β ἐστιν ὅμοιον. to (the rectilinear figure) C. I say that A is also similar to
᾿Επεὶ γὰρ ὅμοιόν ἐστι τὸ Α τῷ Γ, ἰσογώνιόν τέ ἐστιν B.
αὐτῷ καὶ τὰς περὶ τὰς ἴσας γωνίας πλευρὰς ἀνάλογον ἔχει. For since A is similar to C, (A) is equiangular to (C),
πάλιν, ἐπεὶ ὅμοιόν ἐστι τὸ Β τῷ Γ, ἰσογώνιόν τέ ἐστιν and has the sides about the equal angles proportional
αὐτῷ καὶ τὰς περὶ τὰς ἴσας γωνίας πλευρὰς ἀνάλογον ἔχει. [Def. 6.1]. Again, since B is similar to C, (B) is equianἑκάτερον ἄρα τῶν Α, Β τῷ Γ ἰσογώνιόν τέ ἐστι καὶ τὰς gular to (C), and has the sides about the equal angles
περὶ τὰς ἴσας γωνίας πλευρὰς ἀνάλογον ἔχει [ὥστε καὶ τὸ proportional [Def. 6.1]. Thus, A and B are each equianΑ τῷ Β ἰσογώνιόν τέ ἐστι καὶ τὰς περὶ τὰς ἴσας γωνίας gular to C, and have the sides about the equal angles
178
STOIQEIWN þ. ELEMENTS BOOK 6
πλευρὰς ἀνάλογον ἔχει]. ὅμοιον ἄρα ἐστὶ τὸ Α τῷ Β· ὅπερ proportional [hence, A is also equiangular to B, and has
ἔδει δεῖξαι. the sides about the equal angles proportional]. Thus, A
is similar to B [Def. 6.1]. (Which is) the very thing it was
required to show.
kbþ. Proposition 22
᾿Εὰν τέσσαρες εὐθεῖαι ἀνάλογον ὦσιν, καὶ τὰ ἀπ᾿ αὐτῶν If four straight-lines are proportional then similar, and
εὐθύγραμμα ὅμοιά τε καὶ ὁμοίως ἀναγεγραμμένα ἀνάλογον similarly described, rectilinear figures (drawn) on them
ἔσται· κἂν τὰ ἀπ᾿ αὐτῶν εὐθύγραμμα ὅμοιά τε καὶ ὁμοίως will also be proportional. And if similar, and similarly
ἀναγεγραμμένα ἀνάλογον ᾖ, καὶ αὐτὰι αἱ εὐθεῖαι ἀνάλογον described, rectilinear figures (drawn) on them are proἔσονται. portional then the straight-lines themselves will also be
proportional.
Ζ
Κ
Λ
Γ
Ε
Ξ Ο
Π Ρ
Η Θ
Σ
Α Β ∆
Μ Ν
H
A B C D
E
G
K
L
M N
Q R
O P
S
F
῎Εστωσαν τέσσαρες εὐθεῖαι ἀνάλογον αἱ ΑΒ, ΓΔ, ΕΖ, Let AB, CD, EF, and GH be four proportional
ΗΘ, ὡς ἡ ΑΒ πρὸς τὴν ΓΔ, οὕτως ἡ ΕΖ πρὸς τὴν ΗΘ, καὶ straight-lines, (such that) as AB (is) to CD, so EF (is)
ἀναγεγράφθωσαν ἀπὸ μὲν τῶν ΑΒ, ΓΔ ὅμοιά τε καὶ ὁμοίως to GH. And let the similar, and similarly laid out, recκείμενα εὐθύγραμμα τὰ ΚΑΒ, ΛΓΔ, ἀπὸ δὲ τῶν ΕΖ, ΗΘ tilinear figures KAB and LCD have been described on
ὅμοιά τε καὶ ὁμοίως κείμενα εὐθύγραμμα τὰ ΜΖ, ΝΘ· λέγω, AB and CD (respectively), and the similar, and similarly
ὅτι ἐστὶν ὡς τὸ ΚΑΒ πρὸς τὸ ΛΓΔ, οὕτως τὸ ΜΖ πρὸς τὸ laid out, rectilinear figures MF and NH on EF and GH
ΝΘ. (respectively). I say that as KAB is to LCD, so MF (is)
Εἰλήφθω γὰρ τῶν μὲν ΑΒ, ΓΔ τρίτη ἀνάλογον ἡ Ξ, τῶν to NH.
δὲ ΕΖ, ΗΘ τρίτη ἀνάλογον ἡ Ο. καὶ ἐπεί ἐστιν ὡς μὲν ἡ ΑΒ For let a third (straight-line) O have been taken
πρὸς τὴν ΓΔ, οὕτως ἡ ΕΖ πρὸς τὴν ΗΘ, ὡς δὲ ἡ ΓΔ πρὸς (which is) proportional to AB and CD, and a third
τὴν Ξ, οὕτως ἡ ΗΘ πρὸς τὴν Ο, δι᾿ ἴσου ἄρα ἐστὶν ὡς ἡ (straight-line) P proportional to EF and GH [Prop. 6.11].
ΑΒ πρὸς τὴν Ξ, οὕτως ἡ ΕΖ πρὸς τὴν Ο. ἀλλ᾿ ὡς μὲν ἡ And since as AB is to CD, so EF (is) to GH, and as CD
ΑΒ πρὸς τὴν Ξ, οὕτως [καὶ] τὸ ΚΑΒ πρὸς τὸ ΛΓΔ, ὡς δὲ (is) to O, so GH (is) to P, thus, via equality, as AB is to
ἡ ΕΖ πρὸς τὴν Ο, οὕτως τὸ ΜΖ πρὸς τὸ ΝΘ· καὶ ὡς ἄρα O, so EF (is) to P [Prop. 5.22]. But, as AB (is) to O, so
τὸ ΚΑΒ πρὸς τὸ ΛΓΔ, οὕτως τὸ ΜΖ πρὸς τὸ ΝΘ. [also] KAB (is) to LCD, and as EF (is) to P, so MF
᾿Αλλὰ δὴ ἔστω ὡς τὸ ΚΑΒ πρὸς τὸ ΛΓΔ, οὕτως τὸ ΜΖ (is) to NH [Prop. 5.19 corr.]. And, thus, as KAB (is) to
πρὸς τὸ ΝΘ· λέγω, ὅτι ἐστὶ καὶ ὡς ἡ ΑΒ πρὸς τὴν ΓΔ, LCD, so MF (is) to NH.
οὕτως ἡ ΕΖ πρὸς τὴν ΗΘ. εἰ γὰρ μή ἐστιν, ὡς ἡ ΑΒ πρὸς And so let KAB be to LCD, as MF (is) to NH. I say
τὴν ΓΔ, οὕτως ἡ ΕΖ πρὸς τὴν ΗΘ, ἔστω ὡς ἡ ΑΒ πρὸς τὴν also that as AB is to CD, so EF (is) to GH. For if as AB
ΓΔ, οὕτως ἡ ΕΖ πρὸς τὴν ΠΡ, καὶ ἀναγεγράφθω ἀπὸ τῆς is to CD, so EF (is) not to GH, let AB be to CD, as EF
179
STOIQEIWN þ. ELEMENTS BOOK 6
ΠΡ ὁποτέρῳ τῶν ΜΖ, ΝΘ ὅμοιόν τε καὶ ὁμοίως κείμενον (is) to QR [Prop. 6.12]. And let the rectilinear figure SR,
εὐθύγραμμον τὸ ΣΡ. similar, and similarly laid down, to either of MF or NH,
᾿Επεὶ οὖν ἐστιν ὡς ἡ ΑΒ πρὸς τὴν ΓΔ, οὕτως ἡ ΕΖ πρὸς have been described on QR [Props. 6.18, 6.21].
τὴν ΠΡ, καὶ ἀναγέγραπται ἀπὸ μὲν τῶν ΑΒ, ΓΔ ὅμοιά τε Therefore, since as AB is to CD, so EF (is) to QR,
καὶ ὁμοίως κείμενα τὰ ΚΑΒ, ΛΓΔ, ἀπὸ δὲ τῶν ΕΖ, ΠΡ and the similar, and similarly laid out, (rectilinear figὅμοιά τε καὶ ὁμοίως κείμενα τὰ ΜΖ, ΣΡ, ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς τὸ ures) KAB and LCD have been described on AB and
ΚΑΒ πρὸς τὸ ΛΓΔ, οὕτως τὸ ΜΖ πρὸς τὸ ΣΡ. ὑπόκειται CD (respectively), and the similar, and similarly laid out,
δὲ καὶ ὡς τὸ ΚΑΒ πρὸς τὸ ΛΓΔ, οὕτως τὸ ΜΖ πρὸς τὸ (rectilinear figures) MF and SR on EF and QR (reΝΘ· καὶ ὡς ἄρα τὸ ΜΖ πρὸς τὸ ΣΡ, οὕτως τὸ ΜΖ πρὸς sespectively), thus as KAB is to LCD, so MF (is) to
τὸ ΝΘ. τὸ ΜΖ ἄρα πρὸς ἑκάτερον τῶν ΝΘ, ΣΡ τὸν αὐτὸν SR (see above). And it was also assumed that as KAB
ἔχει λόγον· ἴσον ἄρα ἐστὶ τὸ ΝΘ τῷ ΣΡ. ἔστι δὲ αὐτῷ καὶ (is) to LCD, so MF (is) to NH. Thus, also, as MF (is)
ὅμοιον καὶ ὁμοίως κείμενον· ἴση ἄρα ἡ ΗΘ τῇ ΠΡ. καὶ ἐπεί to SR, so MF (is) to NH [Prop. 5.11]. Thus, MF has
ἐστιν ὡς ἡ ΑΒ πρὸς τὴν ΓΔ, οὕτως ἡ ΕΖ πρὸς τὴν ΠΡ, ἴση the same ratio to each of NH and SR. Thus, NH is equal
δὲ ἡ ΠΡ τῇ ΗΘ, ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς ἡ ΑΒ πρὸς τὴν ΓΔ, οὕτως ἡ to SR [Prop. 5.9]. And it is also similar, and similarly laid
ΕΖ πρὸς τὴν ΗΘ. out, to it. Thus, GH (is) equal to QR.
† And since AB is
᾿Εὰν ἄρα τέσσαρες εὐθεῖαι ἀνάλογον ὦσιν, καὶ τὰ ἀπ᾿ to CD, as EF (is) to QR, and QR (is) equal to GH, thus
αὐτῶν εὐθύγραμμα ὅμοιά τε καὶ ὁμοίως ἀναγεγραμμένα as AB is to CD, so EF (is) to GH.
ἀνάλογον ἔσται· κἂν τὰ ἀπ᾿ αὐτῶν εὐθύγραμμα ὅμοιά τε Thus, if four straight-lines are proportional, then simκαὶ ὁμοίως ἀναγεγραμμένα ἀνάλογον ᾖ, καὶ αὐτὰι αἱ εὐθεῖαι ilar, and similarly described, rectilinear figures (drawn)
ἀνάλογον ἔσονται· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. on them will also be proportional. And if similar, and
similarly described, rectilinear figures (drawn) on them
are proportional then the straight-lines themselves will
also be proportional. (Which is) the very thing it was
required to show.
† Here, Euclid assumes, without proof, that if two similar figures are equal then any pair of corresponding sides is also equal.
kgþ. Proposition 23
Τὰ ἰσογώνια παραλληλόγραμμα πρὸς ἄλληλα λόγον ἔχει Equiangular parallelograms have to one another the
τὸν συγκείμενον ἐκ τῶν πλευρῶν. ratio compounded† out of (the ratios of) their sides.
῎Εστω ἰσογώνια παραλληλόγραμμα τὰ ΑΓ, ΓΖ ἴσην Let AC and CF be equiangular parallelograms having
ἔχοντα τὴν ὑπὸ ΒΓΔ γωνίαν τῇ ὑπὸ ΕΓΗ· λέγω, ὅτι τὸ ΑΓ angle BCD equal to ECG. I say that parallelogram AC
παραλληλόγραμμον πρὸς τὸ ΓΖ παραλληλόγραμμον λόγον has to parallelogram CF the ratio compounded out of
ἔχει τὸν συγκείμενον ἐκ τῶν πλευρῶν. (the ratios of) their sides.
Κείσθω γὰρ ὥστε ἐπ᾿ εὐθείας εἶναι τὴν ΒΓ τῇ ΓΗ· ἐπ᾿ For let BC be laid down so as to be straight-on to
εὐθείας ἄρα ἐστὶ καὶ ἡ ΔΓ τῇ ΓΕ. καὶ συμπεπληρώσθω τὸ CG. Thus, DC is also straight-on to CE [Prop. 1.14].
ΔΗ παραλληλόγραμμον, καὶ ἐκκείσθω τις εὐθεῖα ἡ Κ, καὶ And let the parallelogram DG have been completed. And
γεγονέτω ὡς μὲν ἡ ΒΓ πρὸς τὴν ΓΗ, οὕτως ἡ Κ πρὸς τὴν let some straight-line K have been laid down. And let it
Λ, ὡς δὲ ἡ ΔΓ πρὸς τὴν ΓΕ, οὕτως ἡ Λ πρὸς τὴν Μ. be contrived that as BC (is) to CG, so K (is) to L, and
Οἱ ἄρα λόγοι τῆς τε Κ πρὸς τὴν Λ καὶ τῆς Λ πρὸς as DC (is) to CE, so L (is) to M [Prop. 6.12].
τὴν Μ οἱ αὐτοί εἰσι τοῖς λόγοις τῶν πλευρῶν, τῆς τε ΒΓ Thus, the ratios of K to L and of L to M are the same
πρὸς τὴν ΓΗ καὶ τῆς ΔΓ πρὸς τὴν ΓΕ. ἀλλ᾿ ὁ τῆς Κ πρὸς as the ratios of the sides, (namely), BC to CG and DC
Μ λόγος σύγκειται ἔκ τε τοῦ τῆς Κ πρὸς Λ λόγου καὶ to CE (respectively). But, the ratio of K to M is comτοῦ τῆς Λ πρὸς Μ· ὥστε καὶ ἡ Κ πρὸς τὴν Μ λόγον ἔχει pounded out of the ratio of K to L and (the ratio) of L
τὸν συγκείμενον ἐκ τῶν πλευρῶν. καὶ ἐπεί ἐστιν ὡς ἡ ΒΓ to M. Hence, K also has to M the ratio compounded
πρὸς τὴν ΓΗ, οὕτως τὸ ΑΓ παραλληλόγραμμον πρὸς τὸ out of (the ratios of) the sides (of the parallelograms).
ΓΘ, ἀλλ᾿ ὡς ἡ ΒΓ πρὸς τὴν ΓΗ, οὕτως ἡ Κ πρὸς τὴν Λ, And since as BC is to CG, so parallelogram AC (is) to
καὶ ὡς ἄρα ἡ Κ πρὸς τὴν Λ, οὕτως τὸ ΑΓ πρὸς τὸ ΓΘ. CH [Prop. 6.1], but as BC (is) to CG, so K (is) to L,
πάλιν, ἐπεί ἐστιν ὡς ἡ ΔΓ πρὸς τὴν ΓΕ, οὕτως τὸ ΓΘ πα- thus, also, as K (is) to L, so (parallelogram) AC (is) to
ραλληλόγραμμον πρὸς τὸ ΓΖ, ἀλλ᾿ ὡς ἡ ΔΓ πρὸς τὴν ΓΕ, CH. Again, since as DC (is) to CE, so parallelogram
180
STOIQEIWN þ. ELEMENTS BOOK 6
οὕτως ἡ Λ πρὸς τὴν Μ, καὶ ὡς ἄρα ἡ Λ πρὸς τὴν Μ, οὕτως CH (is) to CF [Prop. 6.1], but as DC (is) to CE, so L
τὸ ΓΘ παραλληλόγραμμον πρὸς τὸ ΓΖ παραλληλόγραμμον. (is) to M, thus, also, as L (is) to M, so parallelogram
ἐπεὶ οὖν ἐδείχθη, ὡς μὲν ἡ Κ πρὸς τὴν Λ, οὕτως τὸ ΑΓ CH (is) to parallelogram CF. Therefore, since it was
παραλληλόγραμμον πρὸς τὸ ΓΘ παραλληλόγραμμον, ὡς δὲ shown that as K (is) to L, so parallelogram AC (is) to
ἡ Λ πρὸς τὴν Μ, οὕτως τὸ ΓΘ παραλληλόγραμμον πρὸς τὸ parallelogram CH, and as L (is) to M, so parallelogram
ΓΖ παραλληλόγραμμον, δι᾿ ἴσου ἄρα ἐστὶν ὡς ἡ Κ πρὸς τὴν CH (is) to parallelogram CF, thus, via equality, as K is
Μ, οὕτως τὸ ΑΓ πρὸς τὸ ΓΖ παραλληλόγραμμον. ἡ δὲ Κ to M, so (parallelogram) AC (is) to parallelogram CF
πρὸς τὴν Μ λόγον ἔχει τὸν συγκείμενον ἐκ τῶν πλευρῶν· [Prop. 5.22]. And K has to M the ratio compounded out
καὶ τὸ ΑΓ ἄρα πρὸς τὸ ΓΖ λόγον ἔχει τὸν συγκείμενον ἐκ of (the ratios of) the sides (of the parallelograms). Thus,
τῶν πλευρῶν. (parallelogram) AC also has to (parallelogram) CF the
ratio compounded out of (the ratio of) their sides.
Η
Α
Β Γ
Κ
Λ
Μ
Ε
∆ Θ
Ζ F
A
B
K
L
M
C G
E
D H
Τὰ ἄρα ἰσογώνια παραλληλόγραμμα πρὸς ἄλληλα λόγον Thus, equiangular parallelograms have to one another
ἔχει τὸν συγκείμενον ἐκ τῶν πλευρῶν· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. the ratio compounded out of (the ratio of) their sides.
(Which is) the very thing it was required to show.
†
In modern terminology, if two ratios are “compounded” then they are multiplied together.
kdþ. Proposition 24
Παντὸς παραλληλογράμμου τὰ περὶ τὴν διάμετρον πα- In any parallelogram the parallelograms about the diραλληλόγραμμα ὅμοιά ἐστι τῷ τε ὅλῳ καὶ ἀλλήλοις. agonal are similar to the whole, and to one another.
῎Εστω παραλληλόγραμμον τὸ ΑΒΓΔ, διάμετρος δὲ Let ABCD be a parallelogram, and AC its diagonal.
αὐτοῦ ἡ ΑΓ, περὶ δὲ τὴν ΑΓ παραλληλόγραμμα ἔστω τὰ ΕΗ, And let EG and HK be parallelograms about AC. I say
ΘΚ· λέγω, ὅτι ἑκάτερον τῶν ΕΗ, ΘΚ παραλληλογράμμων that the parallelograms EG and HK are each similar to
ὅμοιόν ἐστι ὅλῳ τῷ ΑΒΓΔ καὶ ἀλλήλοις. the whole (parallelogram) ABCD, and to one another.
᾿Επεὶ γὰρ τριγώνου τοῦ ΑΒΓ παρὰ μίαν τῶν πλευρῶν For since EF has been drawn parallel to one of the
τὴν ΒΓ ἦκται ἡ ΕΖ, ἀνάλογόν ἐστιν ὡς ἡ ΒΕ πρὸς τὴν sides BC of triangle ABC, proportionally, as BE is to
ΕΑ, οὕτως ἡ ΓΖ πρὸς τὴν ΖΑ. πάλιν, ἐπεὶ τριγώνου τοῦ EA, so CF (is) to FA [Prop. 6.2]. Again, since FG has
ΑΓΔ παρὰ μίαν τὴν ΓΔ ἦκται ἡ ΖΗ, ἀνάλογόν ἐστιν ὡς ἡ been drawn parallel to one (of the sides) CD of trianΓΖ πρὸς τὴν ΖΑ, οὕτως ἡ ΔΗ πρὸς τὴν ΗΑ. ἀλλ᾿ ὡς ἡ gle ACD, proportionally, as CF is to FA, so DG (is) to
ΓΖ πρὸς τὴν ΖΑ, οὕτως ἐδείχθη καὶ ἡ ΒΕ πρὸς τὴν ΕΑ· GA [Prop. 6.2]. But, as CF (is) to FA, so it was also
καὶ ὡς ἄρα ἡ ΒΕ πρὸς τὴν ΕΑ, οὕτως ἡ ΔΗ πρὸς τὴν shown (is) BE to EA. And thus as BE (is) to EA, so
ΗΑ, καὶ συνθέντι ἄρα ὡς ἡ ΒΑ πρὸς ΑΕ, οὕτως ἡ ΔΑ DG (is) to GA. And, thus, compounding, as BA (is) to
πρὸς ΑΗ, καὶ ἐναλλὰξ ὡς ἡ ΒΑ πρὸς τὴν ΑΔ, οὕτως ἡ AE, so DA (is) to AG [Prop. 5.18]. And, alternately, as
ΕΑ πρὸς τὴν ΑΗ. τῶν ἄρα ΑΒΓΔ, ΕΗ παραλληλογράμμων BA (is) to AD, so EA (is) to AG [Prop. 5.16]. Thus,
ἀνάλογόν εἰσιν αἱ πλευραὶ αἱ περὶ τὴν κοινὴν γωνίαν τὴν ὑπὸ in parallelograms ABCD and EG the sides about the
ΒΑΔ. καὶ ἐπεὶ παράλληλός ἐστιν ἡ ΗΖ τῇ ΔΓ, ἴση ἐστὶν common angle BAD are proportional. And since GF is
ἡ μὲν ὑπὸ ΑΖΗ γωνία τῇ ὑπὸ ΔΓΑ· καὶ κοινὴ τῶν δύο parallel to DC, angle AFG is equal to DCA [Prop. 1.29].
181
STOIQEIWN þ. ELEMENTS BOOK 6
τριγώνων τῶν ΑΔΓ, ΑΗΖ ἡ ὑπὸ ΔΑΓ γωνία· ἰσογώνιον And angle DAC (is) common to the two triangles ADC
ἄρα ἐστὶ τὸ ΑΔΓ τρίγωνον τῷ ΑΗΖ τριγώνῳ. διὰ τὰ αὐτὰ and AGF. Thus, triangle ADC is equiangular to triangle
δὴ καὶ τὸ ΑΓΒ τρίγωνον ἰσογώνιόν ἐστι τῷ ΑΖΕ τριγώνῳ, AGF [Prop. 1.32]. So, for the same (reasons), triangle
καὶ ὅλον τὸ ΑΒΓΔ παραλληλόγραμμον τῷ ΕΗ παραλλη- ACB is equiangular to triangle AFE, and the whole parλογράμμῳ ἰσογώνιόν ἐστιν. ἀνάλογον ἄρα ἐστὶν ὡς ἡ ΑΔ allelogram ABCD is equiangular to parallelogram EG.
πρὸς τὴν ΔΓ, οὕτως ἡ ΑΗ πρὸς τὴν ΗΖ, ὡς δὲ ἡ ΔΓ πρὸς Thus, proportionally, as AD (is) to DC, so AG (is) to
τὴν ΓΑ, οὕτως ἡ ΗΖ πρὸς τὴν ΖΑ, ὡς δὲ ἡ ΑΓ πρὸς τὴν GF, and as DC (is) to CA, so GF (is) to FA, and as AC
ΓΒ, οὕτως ἡ ΑΖ πρὸς τὴν ΖΕ, καὶ ἔτι ὡς ἡ ΓΒ πρὸς τὴν (is) to CB, so AF (is) to FE, and, further, as CB (is)
ΒΑ, οὕτως ἡ ΖΕ πρὸς τὴν ΕΑ. καὶ ἐπεὶ ἐδείχθη ὡς μὲν to BA, so FE (is) to EA [Prop. 6.4]. And since it was
ἡ ΔΓ πρὸς τὴν ΓΑ, οὕτως ἡ ΗΖ πρὸς τὴν ΖΑ, ὡς δὲ ἡ shown that as DC is to CA, so GF (is) to FA, and as
ΑΓ πρὸς τὴν ΓΒ, οὕτως ἡ ΑΖ πρὸς τὴν ΖΕ, δι᾿ ἴσου ἄρα AC (is) to CB, so AF (is) to FE, thus, via equality, as
ἐστὶν ὡς ἡ ΔΓ πρὸς τὴν ΓΒ, οὕτως ἡ ΗΖ πρὸς τὴν ΖΕ. DC is to CB, so GF (is) to FE [Prop. 5.22]. Thus, in
τῶν ἄρα ΑΒΓΔ, ΕΗ παραλληλογράμμων ἀνάλογόν εἰσιν parallelograms ABCD and EG the sides about the equal
αἱ πλευραὶ αἱ περὶ τὰς ἴσας γωνίας· ὅμοιον ἄρα ἐστὶ τὸ angles are proportional. Thus, parallelogram ABCD is
ΑΒΓΔ παραλληλογράμμον τῷ ΕΗ παραλληλογράμμῳ. διὰ similar to parallelogram EG [Def. 6.1]. So, for the same
τὰ αὐτὰ δὴ τὸ ΑΒΓΔ παραλληλόγραμμον καὶ τῷ ΚΘ πα- (reasons), parallelogram ABCD is also similar to parραλληλογράμμῳ ὅμοιόν ἐστιν· ἑκάτερον ἄρα τῶν ΕΗ, ΘΚ allelogram KH. Thus, parallelograms EG and HK are
παραλληλογράμμων τῷ ΑΒΓΔ [παραλληλογράμμῳ] ὅμοιόν each similar to [parallelogram] ABCD. And (rectilinἐστιν. τὰ δὲ τῷ αὐτῷ εὐθυγράμμῳ ὅμοια καὶ ἀλλήλοις ἐστὶν ear figures) similar to the same rectilinear figure are also
ὅμοια· καὶ τὸ ΕΗ ἄρα παραλληλόγραμμον τῷ ΘΚ παραλλη- similar to one another [Prop. 6.21]. Thus, parallelogram
λογράμμῳ ὅμοιόν ἐστιν. EG is also similar to parallelogram HK.
Θ
∆ Γ
Α Β
Ζ Η
Ε
Κ
A B E
G
F H
D K C
Παντὸς ἄρα παραλληλογράμμου τὰ περὶ τὴν διάμετρον Thus, in any parallelogram the parallelograms about
παραλληλόγραμμα ὅμοιά ἐστι τῷ τε ὅλῳ καὶ ἀλλήλοις· ὅπερ the diagonal are similar to the whole, and to one another.
ἔδει δεῖξαι. (Which is) the very thing it was required to show.
keþ. Proposition 25
Τῷ δοθέντι εὐθυγράμμῳ ὅμοιον καὶ ἄλλῳ τῷ δοθέντι To construct a single (rectilinear figure) similar to a
ἴσον τὸ αὐτὸ συστήσασθαι. given rectilinear figure, and equal to a different given rectilinear figure.
182
STOIQEIWN þ. ELEMENTS BOOK 6
Η Θ
Κ
Γ
Α
∆
Β
Λ Ε Μ
Ζ F
A
B
C
K
G H
E
D
L M
῎Εστω τὸ μὲν δοθὲν εὐθύγραμμον, ᾧ δεῖ ὅμοιον Let ABC be the given rectilinear figure to which it is
συστήσασθαι, τὸ ΑΒΓ, ᾧ δὲ δεῖ ἴσον, τὸ Δ· δεῖ δὴ τῷ required to construct a similar (rectilinear figure), and D
μὲν ΑΒΓ ὅμοιον, τῷ δὲ Δ ἴσον τὸ αὐτὸ συστήσασθαι. the (rectilinear figure) to which (the constructed figure)
Παραβεβλήσθω γὰρ παρὰ μὲν τὴν ΒΓ τῷ ΑΒΓ τριγώνῳ is required (to be) equal. So it is required to construct
ἴσον παραλληλόγραμμον τὸ ΒΕ, παρὰ δὲ τὴν ΓΕ τῷ Δ ἴσον a single (rectilinear figure) similar to ABC, and equal to
παραλληλόγραμμον τὸ ΓΜ ἐν γωνίᾳ τῇ ὑπὸ ΖΓΕ, ἥ ἐστιν D.
ἴση τῇ ὑπὸ ΓΒΛ. ἐπ᾿ εὐθείας ἄρα ἐστὶν ἡ μὲν ΒΓ τῇ ΓΖ, ἡ For let the parallelogram BE, equal to triangle ABC,
δὲ ΛΕ τῇ ΕΜ. καὶ εἰλήφθω τῶν ΒΓ, ΓΖ μέση ἀνάλογον ἡ have been applied to (the straight-line) BC [Prop. 1.44],
ΗΘ, καὶ ἀναγεγράφθω ἀπὸ τῆς ΗΘ τῷ ΑΒΓ ὅμοιόν τε καὶ and the parallelogram CM, equal to D, (have been apὁμοίως κείμενον τὸ ΚΗΘ. plied) to (the straight-line) CE, in the angle FCE, which
Καὶ ἐπεί ἐστιν ὡς ἡ ΒΓ πρὸς τὴν ΗΘ, οὕτως ἡ ΗΘ is equal to CBL [Prop. 1.45]. Thus, BC is straight-on to
πρὸς τὴν ΓΖ, ἐὰν δὲ τρεῖς εὐθεῖαι ἀνάλογον ὦσιν, ἔστιν CF, and LE to EM [Prop. 1.14]. And let the mean proὡς ἡ πρώτη πρὸς τὴν τρίτην, οὕτως τὸ ἀπὸ τῆς πρώτης portion GH have been taken of BC and CF [Prop. 6.13].
εἶδος πρὸς τὸ ἀπὸ τῆς δευτέρας τὸ ὅμοιον καὶ ὁμοίως ἀνα- And let KGH, similar, and similarly laid out, to ABC
γραφόμενον, ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς ἡ ΒΓ πρὸς τὴν ΓΖ, οὕτως τὸ have been described on GH [Prop. 6.18].
ΑΒΓ τρίγωνον πρὸς τὸ ΚΗΘ τρίγωνον. ἀλλὰ καὶ ὡς ἡ ΒΓ And since as BC is to GH, so GH (is) to CF, and if
πρὸς τὴν ΓΖ, οὕτως τὸ ΒΕ παραλληλόγραμμον πρὸς τὸ ΕΖ three straight-lines are proportional then as the first is to
παραλληλόγραμμον. καὶ ὡς ἄρα τὸ ΑΒΓ τρίγωνον πρὸς τὸ the third, so the figure (described) on the first (is) to the
ΚΗΘ τρίγωνον, οὕτως τὸ ΒΕ παραλληλόγραμμον πρὸς τὸ similar, and similarly described, (figure) on the second
ΕΖ παραλληλόγραμμον· ἐναλλὰξ ἄρα ὡς τὸ ΑΒΓ τρίγωνον [Prop. 6.19 corr.], thus as BC is to CF, so triangle ABC
πρὸς τὸ ΒΕ παραλληλόγραμμον, οὕτως τὸ ΚΗΘ τρίγωνον (is) to triangle KGH. But, also, as BC (is) to CF, so
πρὸς τὸ ΕΖ παραλληλόγραμμον. ἴσον δὲ τὸ ΑΒΓ τρίγωνον parallelogram BE (is) to parallelogram EF [Prop. 6.1].
τῷ ΒΕ παραλληλογράμμῳ· ἴσον ἄρα καὶ τὸ ΚΗΘ τρίγωνον And, thus, as triangle ABC (is) to triangle KGH, so parτῷ ΕΖ παραλληλογράμμῳ. ἀλλὰ τὸ ΕΖ παραλληλόγραμμον allelogram BE (is) to parallelogram EF. Thus, alterτῷ Δ ἐστιν ἴσον· καὶ τὸ ΚΗΘ ἄρα τῷ Δ ἐστιν ἴσον. ἔστι nately, as triangle ABC (is) to parallelogram BE, so triδὲ τὸ ΚΗΘ καὶ τῷ ΑΒΓ ὅμοιον. angle KGH (is) to parallelogram EF [Prop. 5.16]. And
Τῷ ἄρα δοθέντι εὐθυγράμμῳ τῷ ΑΒΓ ὅμοιον καὶ ἄλλῳ triangle ABC (is) equal to parallelogram BE. Thus, triτῷ δοθέντι τῷ Δ ἴσον τὸ αὐτὸ συνέσταται τὸ ΚΗΘ· ὅπερ angle KGH (is) also equal to parallelogram EF. But,
ἔδει ποιῆσαι. parallelogram EF is equal to D. Thus, KGH is also equal
to D. And KGH is also similar to ABC.
Thus, a single (rectilinear figure) KGH has been constructed (which is) similar to the given rectilinear figure
ABC, and equal to a different given (rectilinear figure)
D. (Which is) the very thing it was required to do.
kþ. Proposition 26
᾿Εὰν ἀπὸ παραλληλογράμμου παραλληλόγραμμον ἀφαι- If from a parallelogram a(nother) parallelogram is
ρεθῇ ὅμοιόν τε τῷ ὅλῳ καὶ ὁμοίως κείμενον κοινὴν γωνίαν subtracted (which is) similar, and similarly laid out, to
ἔχον αὐτῷ, περὶ τὴν αὐτὴν διάμετρόν ἐστι τῷ ὅλῳ. the whole, having a common angle with it, then (the sub-
᾿Απὸ γὰρ παραλληλογράμμου τοῦ ΑΒΓΔ παραλληλόγρα- tracted parallelogram) is about the same diagonal as the
μμον ἀφῃρήσθω τὸ ΑΖ ὅμοιον τῷ ΑΒΓΔ καὶ ὁμοίως whole.
κείμενον κοινὴν γωνίαν ἔχον αὐτῷ τὴν ὑπὸ ΔΑΒ· λέγω, For, from parallelogram ABCD, let (parallelogram)
183
STOIQEIWN þ. ELEMENTS BOOK 6
ὅτι περὶ τὴν αὐτὴν διάμετρόν ἐστι τὸ ΑΒΓΔ τῷ ΑΖ. AF have been subtracted (which is) similar, and similarly
laid out, to ABCD, having the common angle DAB with
it. I say that ABCD is about the same diagonal as AF.
Θ
Β
Α Η
Γ
∆
Ε Ζ
Κ K
A G D
B
H
F
C
E
Μὴ γάρ, ἀλλ᾿ εἰ δυνατόν, ἔστω [αὐτῶν] διάμετρος ἡ For (if) not, then, if possible, let AHC be [ABCD’s]
ΑΘΓ, καὶ ἐκβληθεῖσα ἡ ΗΖ διήχθω ἐπὶ τὸ Θ, καὶ ἤχθω diagonal. And producing GF, let it have been drawn
διὰ τοῦ Θ ὁπορέρᾳ τῶν ΑΔ, ΒΓ παράλληλος ἡ ΘΚ. through to (point) H. And let HK have been drawn
᾿Επεὶ οὖν περὶ τὴν αὐτὴν διάμετρόν ἐστι τὸ ΑΒΓΔ τῷ through (point) H, parallel to either of AD or BC
ΚΗ, ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς ἡ ΔΑ πρὸς τὴν ΑΒ, οὕτως ἡ ΗΑ πρὸς [Prop. 1.31].
τὴν ΑΚ. ἔστι δὲ καὶ διὰ τὴν ὁμοιότητα τῶν ΑΒΓΔ, ΕΗ καὶ Therefore, since ABCD is about the same diagonal as
ὡς ἡ ΔΑ πρὸς τὴν ΑΒ, οὕτως ἡ ΗΑ πρὸς τὴν ΑΕ· καὶ ὡς KG, thus as DA is to AB, so GA (is) to AK [Prop. 6.24].
ἄρα ἡ ΗΑ πρὸς τὴν ΑΚ, οὕτως ἡ ΗΑ πρὸς τὴν ΑΕ. ἡ ΗΑ And, on account of the similarity of ABCD and EG, also,
ἄρα πρὸς ἑκατέραν τῶν ΑΚ, ΑΕ τὸν αὐτὸν ἔχει λόγον. ἴση as DA (is) to AB, so GA (is) to AE. Thus, also, as GA
ἄρα ἐστὶν ἡ ΑΕ τῇ ΑΚ ἡ ἐλάττων τῇ μείζονι· ὅπερ ἐστὶν (is) to AK, so GA (is) to AE. Thus, GA has the same
ἀδύνατον. οὐκ ἄρα οὔκ ἐστι περὶ τὴν αὐτὴν διάμετρον τὸ ratio to each of AK and AE. Thus, AE is equal to AK
ΑΒΓΔ τῷ ΑΖ· περὶ τὴν αὐτὴν ἄρα ἐστὶ διάμετρον τὸ ΑΒΓΔ [Prop. 5.9], the lesser to the greater. The very thing is
παραλληλόγραμμον τῷ ΑΖ παραλληλογράμμῳ. impossible. Thus, ABCD is not not about the same di-
᾿Εὰν ἄρα ἀπὸ παραλληλογράμμου παραλληλόγραμμον agonal as AF. Thus, parallelogram ABCD is about the
ἀφαιρεθῇ ὅμοιόν τε τῷ ὅλῳ καὶ ὁμοίως κείμενον κοινὴν same diagonal as parallelogram AF.
γωνίαν ἔχον αὐτῷ, περὶ τὴν αὐτὴν διάμετρόν ἐστι τῷ ὅλῳ· Thus, if from a parallelogram a(nother) parallelogram
ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. is subtracted (which is) similar, and similarly laid out,
to the whole, having a common angle with it, then (the
subtracted parallelogram) is about the same diagonal as
the whole. (Which is) the very thing it was required to
show.
kzþ. Proposition 27
Πάντων τῶν παρὰ τὴν αὐτὴν εὐθεῖαν παραβαλλομένων Of all the parallelograms applied to the same straightπαραλληλογράμμων καὶ ἐλλειπόντων εἴδεσι παραλληλογράμ- line, and falling short by parallelogrammic figures similar,
μοις ὁμοίοις τε καὶ ὁμοίως κειμένοις τῷ ἀπὸ τῆς ἡμισείας and similarly laid out, to the (parallelogram) described
ἀναγραφομένῳ μέγιστόν ἐστι τὸ ἀπὸ τῆς ἡμισείας παρα- on half (the straight-line), the greatest is the [paralleloβαλλόμενον [παραλληλόγραμμον] ὅμοιον ὂν τῷ ἐλλείμμαντι. gram] applied to half (the straight-line) which (is) similar
῎Εστω εὐθεῖα ἡ ΑΒ καὶ τετμήσθω δίχα κατὰ τὸ Γ, to (that parallelogram) by which it falls short.
καὶ παραβεβλήσθω παρὰ τὴν ΑΒ εὐθεῖαν τὸ ΑΔ παραλ- Let AB be a straight-line, and let it have been cut in
ληλόγραμμον ἐλλεῖπον εἴδει παραλληλογράμμῳ τῷ ΔΒ ἀνα- half at (point) C [Prop. 1.10]. And let the parallelogram
γραφέντι ἀπὸ τῆς ἡμισείας τῆς ΑΒ, τουτέστι τῆς ΓΒ· λέγω, AD have been applied to the straight-line AB, falling
ὅτι πάντων τῶν παρὰ τὴν ΑΒ παραβαλλομένων παραλλη- short by the parallelogrammic figure DB (which is) apλογράμμων καὶ ἐλλειπόντων εἴδεσι [παραλληλογράμμοις] plied to half of AB—that is to say, CB. I say that of all
ὁμοίοις τε καὶ ὁμοίως κειμένοις τῷ ΔΒ μέγιστόν ἐστι τὸ the parallelograms applied to AB, and falling short by
184
STOIQEIWN þ. ELEMENTS BOOK 6
ΑΔ. παραβεβλήσθω γὰρ παρὰ τὴν ΑΒ εὐθεῖαν τὸ ΑΖ πα- [parallelogrammic] figures similar, and similarly laid out,
ραλληλόγραμμον ἐλλεῖπον εἴδει παραλληλογράμμῳ τῷ ΖΒ to DB, the greatest is AD. For let the parallelogram AF
ὁμοίῳ τε καὶ ὁμοίως κειμένῳ τῷ ΔΒ· λέγω, ὅτι μεῖζόν ἐστι have been applied to the straight-line AB, falling short by
τὸ ΑΔ τοῦ ΑΖ. the parallelogrammic figure FB (which is) similar, and
similarly laid out, to DB. I say that AD is greater than
AF.
Λ
Α
Ζ Θ
Β
Ε
Γ Κ
∆
Μ Η
Ν
F
A C K
G
D
L
N
M
B
H
E
᾿Επεὶ γὰρ ὅμοιόν ἐστι τὸ ΔΒ παραλληλόγραμμον τῷ ΖΒ For since parallelogram DB is similar to paralleloπαραλληλογράμμῳ, περὶ τὴν αὐτήν εἰσι διάμετρον. ἤχθω gram FB, they are about the same diagonal [Prop. 6.26].
αὐτῶν διάμετρος ἡ ΔΒ, καὶ καταγεγράφθω τὸ σχῆμα. Let their (common) diagonal DB have been drawn, and
᾿Επεὶ οὖν ἴσον ἐστὶ τὸ ΓΖ τῷ ΖΕ, κοινὸν δὲ τὸ ΖΒ, let the (rest of the) figure have been described.
ὅλον ἄρα τὸ ΓΘ ὅλῳ τῷ ΚΕ ἐστιν ἴσον. ἀλλὰ τὸ ΓΘ τῷ Therefore, since (complement) CF is equal to (comΓΗ ἐστιν ἴσον, ἐπεὶ καὶ ἡ ΑΓ τῇ ΓΒ. καὶ τὸ ΗΓ ἄρα τῷ ΕΚ plement) FE [Prop. 1.43], and (parallelogram) FB is
ἐστιν ἴσον. κοινὸν προσκείσθω τὸ ΓΖ· ὅλον ἄρα τὸ ΑΖ τῷ common, the whole (parallelogram) CH is thus equal
ΛΜΝ γνώμονί ἐστιν ἴσον· ὥστε τὸ ΔΒ παραλληλόγραμμον, to the whole (parallelogram) KE. But, (parallelogram)
τουτέστι τὸ ΑΔ, τοῦ ΑΖ παραλληλογράμμου μεῖζόν ἐστιν. CH is equal to CG, since AC (is) also (equal) to CB
Πάντων ἄρα τῶν παρὰ τὴν αὐτὴν εὐθεῖαν παραβαλ- [Prop. 6.1]. Thus, (parallelogram) GC is also equal
λομένων παραλληλογράμμων καὶ ἐλλειπόντων εἴδεσι παραλ- to EK. Let (parallelogram) CF have been added to
ληλογράμμοις ὁμοίοις τε καὶ ὁμοίως κειμένοις τῷ ἀπὸ τῆς both. Thus, the whole (parallelogram) AF is equal to
ἡμισείας ἀναγραφομένῳ μέγιστόν ἐστι τὸ ἀπὸ τῆς ἡμισείας the gnomon LMN. Hence, parallelogram DB—that is to
παραβληθέν· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. say, AD—is greater than parallelogram AF.
Thus, for all parallelograms applied to the same
straight-line, and falling short by a parallelogrammic
figure similar, and similarly laid out, to the (parallelogram) described on half (the straight-line), the greatest
is the [parallelogram] applied to half (the straight-line).
(Which is) the very thing it was required to show.
khþ. Proposition 28†
Παρὰ τὴν δοθεῖσαν εὐθεῖαν τῷ δοθέντι εὐθυγράμμῳ To apply a parallelogram, equal to a given rectilinἴσον παραλληλόγραμμον παραβαλεῖν ἐλλεῖπον εἴδει πα- ear figure, to a given straight-line, (the applied parallelραλληλογράμμῳ ὁμοίῳ τῷ δοθέντι· δεῖ δὲ τὸ διδόμενον ogram) falling short by a parallelogrammic figure similar
εὐθύγραμμον [ᾧ δεῖ ἴσον παραβαλεῖν] μὴ μεῖζον εἶναι τοῦ to a given (parallelogram). It is necessary for the given
ἀπὸ τῆς ἡμισείας ἀναγραφομένου ὁμοίου τῷ ἐλλείμματι [τοῦ rectilinear figure [to which it is required to apply an equal
τε ἀπὸ τῆς ἡμισείας καὶ ᾧ δεῖ ὅμοιον ἐλλείπειν]. (parallelogram)] not to be greater than the (parallelo-
῎Εστω ἡ μὲν δοθεῖσα εὐθεῖα ἡ ΑΒ, τὸ δὲ δοθὲν gram) described on half (of the straight-line) and similar
εὐθύγραμμον, ᾧ δεῖ ἴσον παρὰ τὴν ΑΒ παραβαλεῖν, τὸ Γ μὴ to the deficit.
μεῖζον [ὂν] τοῦ ἀπὸ τῆς ἡμισείας τῆς ΑΒ ἀναγραφομένου Let AB be the given straight-line, and C the given
ὁμοίου τῷ ἐλλείμματι, ᾧ δὲ δεῖ ὅμοιον ἐλλείπειν, τὸ Δ· δεῖ δὴ rectilinear figure to which the (parallelogram) applied to
185
STOIQEIWN þ. ELEMENTS BOOK 6
παρὰ τὴν δοθεῖσαν εὐθεῖαν τὴν ΑΒ τῷ δοθέντι εὐθυγράμμῳ AB is required (to be) equal, [being] not greater than
τῷ Γ ἴσον παραλληλόγραμμον παραβαλεῖν ἐλλεῖπον εἴδει πα- the (parallelogram) described on half of AB and similar
ραλληλογράμμῳ ὁμοίῳ ὄντι τῷ Δ. to the deficit, and D the (parallelogram) to which the
deficit is required (to be) similar. So it is required to apply
a parallelogram, equal to the given rectilinear figure C, to
the straight-line AB, falling short by a parallelogrammic
figure which is similar to D.
P
G
A S B
R
D
T
J O
E
H Z
X
L
K N
M
Q
U
F
W
A B E
H G F
K
Q
P
R
S
T
U
V
D
N
L M
C
O
Τετμήσθω ἡ ΑΒ δίχα κατὰ τὸ Ε σημεῖον, καὶ ἀνα- Let AB have been cut in half at point E [Prop. 1.10],
γεγράφθω ἀπὸ τῆς ΕΒ τῷ Δ ὅμοιον καὶ ὁμοίως κείμενον and let (parallelogram) EBFG, (which is) similar, and
τὸ ΕΒΖΗ, καὶ συμπεπληρώσθω τὸ ΑΗ παραλληλόγραμμον. similarly laid out, to (parallelogram) D, have been deΕἰ μὲν οὖν ἴσον ἐστὶ τὸ ΑΗ τῷ Γ, γεγονὸς ἂν εἴη τὸ ἐπι- scribed on EB [Prop. 6.18]. And let parallelogram AG
ταχθέν· παραβέβληται γὰρ παρὰ τὴν δοθεῖσαν εὐθεῖαν τὴν have been completed.
ΑΒ τῷ δοθέντι εὐθυγράμμῳ τῷ Γ ἴσον παραλληλόγραμμον Therefore, if AG is equal to C then the thing preτὸ ΑΗ ἐλλεῖπον εἴδει παραλληλογράμμῳ τῷ ΗΒ ὁμοίῳ ὄντι scribed has happened. For a parallelogram AG, equal
τῷ Δ. εἰ δὲ οὔ, μεῖζόν ἔστω τὸ ΘΕ τοῦ Γ. ἴσον δὲ τὸ ΘΕ to the given rectilinear figure C, has been applied to the
τῷ ΗΒ· μεῖζον ἄρα καὶ τὸ ΗΒ τοῦ Γ. ᾧ δὴ μεῖζόν ἐστι given straight-line AB, falling short by a parallelogramτὸ ΗΒ τοῦ Γ, ταύτῃ τῇ ὑπεροχῇ ἴσον, τῷ δὲ Δ ὅμοιον καὶ mic figure GB which is similar to D. And if not, let HE
ὁμοίως κείμενον τὸ αὐτὸ συνεστάτω τὸ ΚΛΜΝ. ἀλλὰ τὸ Δ be greater than C. And HE (is) equal to GB [Prop. 6.1].
τῷ ΗΒ [ἐστιν] ὅμοιον· καὶ τὸ ΚΜ ἄρα τῷ ΗΒ ἐστιν ὅμοιον. Thus, GB (is) also greater than C. So, let (paralleloἔστω οὖν ὁμόλογος ἡ μὲν ΚΛ τῂ ΗΕ, ἡ δὲ ΛΜ τῇ ΗΖ. gram) KLMN have been constructed (so as to be) both
καὶ ἐπεὶ ἴσον ἐστὶ τὸ ΗΒ τοῖς Γ, ΚΜ, μεῖζον ἄρα ἐστὶ τὸ similar, and similarly laid out, to D, and equal to the exΗΒ τοῦ ΚΜ· μείζων ἄρα ἐστὶ καὶ ἡ μὲν ΗΕ τῆς ΚΛ, ἡ δὲ cess by which GB is greater than C [Prop. 6.25]. But,
ΗΖ τῆς ΛΜ. κείσθω τῇ μὲν ΚΛ ἴση ἡ ΗΞ, τῇ δὲ ΛΜ ἴση GB [is] similar to D. Thus, KM is also similar to GB
ἡ ΗΟ, καὶ συμπεπληρώσθω τὸ ΞΗΟΠ παραλληλόγραμμον· [Prop. 6.21]. Therefore, let KL correspond to GE, and
ἴσον ἄρα καὶ ὅμοιον ἐστι [τὸ ΗΠ] τῷ ΚΜ [ἀλλὰ τὸ ΚΜ τῷ LM to GF. And since (parallelogram) GB is equal to
ΗΒ ὅμοιόν ἐστιν]. καὶ τὸ ΗΠ ἄρα τῷ ΗΒ ὅμοιόν ἐστιν· περὶ (figure) C and (parallelogram) KM, GB is thus greater
τὴν αὐτὴν ἄρα διάμετρόν ἐστι τὸ ΗΠ τῷ ΗΒ. ἔστω αὐτῶν than KM. Thus, GE is also greater than KL, and GF
διάμετρος ἡ ΗΠΒ, καὶ καταγεγράφθω τὸ σχῆμα. than LM. Let GO be made equal to KL, and GP to LM
᾿Επεὶ οὖν ἴσον ἐστὶ τὸ ΒΗ τοῖς Γ, ΚΜ, ὧν τὸ ΗΠ τῷ [Prop. 1.3]. And let the parallelogram OGPQ have been
ΚΜ ἐστιν ἴσον, λοιπὸς ἄρα ὁ ΥΧΦ γνόμων λοιπῷ τῷ Γ ἴσος completed. Thus, [GQ] is equal and similar to KM [but,
ἐστίν. καὶ ἐπεὶ ἴσον ἐστὶ τὸ ΟΡ τῷ ΞΣ, κοινὸν προσκείσθω KM is similar to GB]. Thus, GQ is also similar to GB
τὸ ΠΒ· ὅλον ἄρα τὸ ΟΒ ὅλῳ τῷ ΞΒ ἴσον ἐστίν. ἀλλὰ τὸ ΞΒ [Prop. 6.21]. Thus, GQ and GB are about the same diagτῷ ΤΕ ἐστιν ἴσον, ἐπεὶ καὶ πλευρὰ ἡ ΑΕ πλευρᾷ τῇ ΕΒ ἐστιν onal [Prop. 6.26]. Let GQB be their (common) diagonal,
ἴση· καὶ τὸ ΤΕ ἄρα τῷ ΟΒ ἐστιν ἴσον. κοινὸν προσκείσθω and let the (remainder of the) figure have been described.
τὸ ΞΣ· ὅλον ἄρα τὸ ΤΣ ὅλῳ τῷ ΦΧΥ γνώμονί ἐστιν ἴσον. Therefore, since BG is equal to C and KM, of which
ἀλλ᾿ ὁ ΦΧΥ γνώμων τῷ Γ ἐδείχθη ἴσος· καὶ τὸ ΤΣ ἄρα τῷ GQ is equal to KM, the remaining gnomon UWV is thus
Γ ἐστιν ἴσον. equal to the remainder C. And since (the complement)
Παρὰ τὴν δοθεῖσαν ἄρα εὐθεῖαν τὴν ΑΒ τῷ δοθέντι PR is equal to (the complement) OS [Prop. 1.43], let
εὐθυγράμμῳ τῷ Γ ἴσον παραλληλόγραμμον παραβέβληται (parallelogram) QB have been added to both. Thus, the
τὸ ΣΤ ἐλλεῖπον εἴδει παραλληλογράμμῳ τῷ ΠΒ ὁμοίῳ ὄντι whole (parallelogram) PB is equal to the whole (par186
STOIQEIWN þ. ELEMENTS BOOK 6
τῷ Δ [ἐπειδήπερ τὸ ΠΒ τῷ ΗΠ ὅμοιόν ἐστιν]· ὅπερ ἔδει allelogram) OB. But, OB is equal to TE, since side
ποιῆσαι. AE is equal to side EB [Prop. 6.1]. Thus, TE is also
equal to PB. Let (parallelogram) OS have been added
to both. Thus, the whole (parallelogram) TS is equal to
the gnomon V WU. But, gnomon V WU was shown (to
be) equal to C. Therefore, (parallelogram) TS is also
equal to (figure) C.
Thus, the parallelogram ST , equal to the given rectilinear figure C, has been applied to the given straightline AB, falling short by the parallelogrammic figure QB,
which is similar to D [inasmuch as QB is similar to GQ
[Prop. 6.24] ]. (Which is) the very thing it was required
to do.
† This proposition is a geometric solution of the quadratic equation x
2−α x+β = 0. Here, x is the ratio of a side of the deficit to the corresponding
side of figure D, α is the ratio of the length of AB to the length of that side of figure D which corresponds to the side of the deficit running along
AB, and β is the ratio of the areas of figures C and D. The constraint corresponds to the condition β < α2/4 for the equation to have real roots.
Only the smaller root of the equation is found. The larger root can be found by a similar method.
kjþ. Proposition 29†
Παρὰ τὴν δοθεῖσαν εὐθεῖαν τῷ δοθέντι εὐθυγράμμῳ To apply a parallelogram, equal to a given rectilinἴσον παραλληλόγραμμον παραβαλεῖν ὑπερβάλλον εἴδει πα- ear figure, to a given straight-line, (the applied paralleloραλληλογράμμῳ ὁμοίῳ τῷ δοθέντι. gram) overshooting by a parallelogrammic figure similar
to a given (parallelogram).
F
G
L M J
O A B
N P
E
Z
H
K
Q
D
X
Y
W
B
C
F H L M K
P
D
N G
E
Q O
A
V
X
῎Εστω ἡ μὲν δοθεῖσα εὐθεῖα ἡ ΑΒ, τὸ δὲ δοθὲν Let AB be the given straight-line, and C the given
εὐθύγραμμον, ᾧ δεῖ ἴσον παρὰ τὴν ΑΒ παραβαλεῖν, τὸ Γ, rectilinear figure to which the (parallelogram) applied to
ᾧ δὲ δεῖ ὅμοιον ὑπερβάλλειν, τὸ Δ· δεῖ δὴ παρὰ τὴν ΑΒ AB is required (to be) equal, and D the (parallelogram)
εὐθεῖαν τῷ Γ εὐθυγράμμῳ ἴσον παραλληλόγραμμον παρα- to which the excess is required (to be) similar. So it is
βαλεῖν ὑπερβάλλον εἴδει παραλληλογράμμῳ ὁμοίῳ τῷ Δ. required to apply a parallelogram, equal to the given recΤετμήσθω ἡ ΑΒ δίχα κατὰ τὸ Ε, καὶ ἀναγεγράθω tilinear figure C, to the given straight-line AB, overshootἀπὸ τὴς ΕΒ τῷ Δ ὅμοιον καὶ ὁμοίως κείμενον παραλ- ing by a parallelogrammic figure similar to D.
ληλόγραμμον τὸ ΒΖ, καὶ συναμφοτέροις μὲν τοῖς ΒΖ, Γ Let AB have been cut in half at (point) E [Prop. 1.10],
ἴσον, τῷ δὲ Δ ὅμοιον καὶ ὁμοίως κείμενον τὸ αὐτὸ συ- and let the parallelogram BF, (which is) similar, and
νεστάτω τὸ ΗΘ. ὁμόλογος δὲ ἔστω ἡ μὲν ΚΘ τῇ ΖΛ, ἡ δὲ similarly laid out, to D, have been described on EB
ΚΗ τῇ ΖΕ. καὶ ἐπεὶ μεῖζόν ἐστι τὸ ΗΘ τοῦ ΖΒ, μείζων ἄρα [Prop. 6.18]. And let (parallelogram) GH have been conἐστὶ καὶ ἡ μὲν ΚΘ τῆς ΖΛ, ἡ δὲ ΚΗ τῇ ΖΕ. ἐκβεβλήσθωσαν structed (so as to be) both similar, and similarly laid out,
αἱ ΖΛ, ΖΕ, καὶ τῇ μὲν ΚΘ ἴση ἔστω ἡ ΖΛΜ, τῇ δὲ ΚΗ ἴση to D, and equal to the sum of BF and C [Prop. 6.25].
ἡ ΖΕΝ, καὶ συμπεπληρώσθω τὸ ΜΝ· τὸ ΜΝ ἄρα τῷ ΗΘ And let KH correspond to FL, and KG to FE. And since
ἴσον τέ ἐστι καὶ ὅμοιον. ἀλλὰ τὸ ΗΘ τῷ ΕΛ ἐστιν ὅμοιον· (parallelogram) GH is greater than (parallelogram) FB,
187
STOIQEIWN þ. ELEMENTS BOOK 6
καὶ τὸ ΜΝ ἄρα τῷ ΕΛ ὅμοιόν ἐστιν· περὶ τὴν αὐτὴν ἄρα KH is thus also greater than FL, and KG than FE.
διάμετρόν ἐστι τὸ ΕΛ τῷ ΜΝ. ἤχθω αὐτῶν διάμετρος ἡ Let FL and FE have been produced, and let FLM be
ΖΞ, καὶ καταγεγράφθω τὸ σχῆμα. (made) equal to KH, and FEN to KG [Prop. 1.3]. And
᾿Επεὶ ἴσον ἐστὶ τὸ ΗΘ τοῖς ΕΛ, Γ, ἀλλὰ τὸ ΗΘ τῷ ΜΝ let (parallelogram) MN have been completed. Thus,
ἴσον ἐστίν, καὶ τὸ ΜΝ ἄρα τοῖς ΕΛ, Γ ἴσον ἐστίν. κοινὸν MN is equal and similar to GH. But, GH is similar to
ἀφῃρήσθω τὸ ΕΛ· λοιπὸς ἄρα ὁ ΨΧΦ γνώμων τῷ Γ ἐστιν EL. Thus, MN is also similar to EL [Prop. 6.21]. EL is
ἴσος. καὶ ἐπεὶ ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ΑΕ τῇ ΕΒ, ἴσον ἐστὶ καὶ τὸ ΑΝ τῷ thus about the same diagonal as MN [Prop. 6.26]. Let
ΝΒ, τουτέστι τῷ ΛΟ. κοινὸν προσκείσθω τὸ ΕΞ· ὅλον ἄρα their (common) diagonal FO have been drawn, and let
τὸ ΑΞ ἴσον ἐστὶ τῷ ΦΧΨ γνώμονι. ἀλλὰ ὁ ΦΧΨ γνώμων the (remainder of the) figure have been described.
τῷ Γ ἴσος ἐστίν· καὶ τὸ ΑΞ ἄρα τῷ Γ ἴσον ἐστίν. And since (parallelogram) GH is equal to (parallelΠαρὰ τὴν δοθεῖσαν ἄρα εὐθεῖαν τὴν ΑΒ τῷ δοθέντι ogram) EL and (figure) C, but GH is equal to (paralεὐθυγράμμῳ τῷ Γ ἴσον παραλληλόγραμμον παραβέβληται lelogram) MN, MN is thus also equal to EL and C.
τὸ ΑΞ ὑπερβάλλον εἴδει παραλληλογράμμῳ τῷ ΠΟ ὁμοίῳ Let EL have been subtracted from both. Thus, the reὄντι τῷ Δ, ἐπεὶ καὶ τῷ ΕΛ ἐστιν ὅμοιον τὸ ΟΠ· ὅπερ ἔδει maining gnomon XWV is equal to (figure) C. And since
ποιῆσαι. AE is equal to EB, (parallelogram) AN is also equal to
(parallelogram) NB [Prop. 6.1], that is to say, (parallelogram) LP [Prop. 1.43]. Let (parallelogram) EO have
been added to both. Thus, the whole (parallelogram) AO
is equal to the gnomon V WX. But, the gnomon V WX
is equal to (figure) C. Thus, (parallelogram) AO is also
equal to (figure) C.
Thus, the parallelogram AO, equal to the given rectilinear figure C, has been applied to the given straightline AB, overshooting by the parallelogrammic figure QP
which is similar to D, since PQ is also similar to EL
[Prop. 6.24]. (Which is) the very thing it was required
to do.
† This proposition is a geometric solution of the quadratic equation x
2+α x−β = 0. Here, x is the ratio of a side of the excess to the corresponding
side of figure D, α is the ratio of the length of AB to the length of that side of figure D which corresponds to the side of the excess running along
AB, and β is the ratio of the areas of figures C and D. Only the positive root of the equation is found.
lþ. Proposition 30†
Τὴν δοθεῖσαν εὐθεῖαν πεπερασμένην ἄκρον καὶ μέσον To cut a given finite straight-line in extreme and mean
λόγον τεμεῖν. ratio.
Ε
Β
Γ Ζ
Α
∆
Θ
E
F H
B
C
A
D
῎Εστω ἡ δοθεῖσα εὐθεῖα πεπερασμένη ἡ ΑΒ· δεῖ δὴ τὴν Let AB be the given finite straight-line. So it is reΑΒ εὐθεῖαν ἄκρον καὶ μέσον λόγον τεμεῖν. quired to cut the straight-line AB in extreme and mean
188
STOIQEIWN þ. ELEMENTS BOOK 6
᾿Αναγεγράφθω ἀπὸ τῆς ΑΒ τετράγωνον τὸ ΒΓ, καὶ πα- ratio.
ραβεβλήσθω παρὰ τὴν ΑΓ τῷ ΒΓ ἴσον παραλληλόγραμμον Let the square BC have been described on AB [Prop.
τὸ ΓΔ ὑπερβάλλον εἴδει τῷ ΑΔ ὁμοίῳ τῷ ΒΓ. 1.46], and let the parallelogram CD, equal to BC, have
Τετράγωνον δέ ἐστι τὸ ΒΓ· τετράγωνον ἄρα ἐστι καὶ been applied to AC, overshooting by the figure AD
τὸ ΑΔ. καὶ ἐπεὶ ἴσον ἐστὶ τὸ ΒΓ τῷ ΓΔ, κοινὸν ἀφῃρήσθω (which is) similar to BC [Prop. 6.29].
τὸ ΓΕ· λοιπὸν ἄρα τὸ ΒΖ λοιπῷ τῷ ΑΔ ἐστιν ἴσον. ἔστι And BC is a square. Thus, AD is also a square.
δὲ αὐτῷ καὶ ἰσογώνιον· τῶν ΒΖ, ΑΔ ἄρα ἀντιπεπόνθασιν αἱ And since BC is equal to CD, let (rectangle) CE have
πλευραὶ αἱ περὶ τὰς ἴσας γωνίας· ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς ἡ ΖΕ πρὸς been subtracted from both. Thus, the remaining (rectτὴν ΕΔ, οὕτως ἡ ΑΕ πρὸς τὴν ΕΒ. ἴση δὲ ἡ μὲν ΖΕ τῇ ΑΒ, angle) BF is equal to the remaining (square) AD. And
ἡ δὲ ΕΔ τῇ ΑΕ. ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς ἡ ΒΑ πρὸς τὴν ΑΕ, οὕτως ἡ it is also equiangular to it. Thus, the sides of BF and
ΑΕ πρὸς τὴν ΕΒ. μείζων δὲ ἡ ΑΒ τῆς ΑΕ· μείζων ἄρα καὶ AD about the equal angles are reciprocally proportional
ἡ ΑΕ τῆς ΕΒ. [Prop. 6.14]. Thus, as FE is to ED, so AE (is) to EB.
῾Η ἄρα ΑΒ εὐθεῖα ἄκρον καὶ μέσον λόγον τέτμηται κατὰ And FE (is) equal to AB, and ED to AE. Thus, as BA is
τὸ Ε, καὶ τὸ μεῖζον αὐτῆς τμῆμά ἐστι τὸ ΑΕ· ὅπερ ἔδει to AE, so AE (is) to EB. And AB (is) greater than AE.
ποιῆσαι. Thus, AE (is) also greater than EB [Prop. 5.14].
Thus, the straight-line AB has been cut in extreme
and mean ratio at E, and AE is its greater piece. (Which
is) the very thing it was required to do.
† This method of cutting a straight-line is sometimes called the “Golden Section”—see Prop. 2.11.
laþ. Proposition 31
᾿Εν τοῖς ὀρθογωνίοις τριγώνοις τὸ ἀπὸ τῆς τὴν ὀρθὴν In right-angled triangles, the figure (drawn) on the
γωνίαν ὑποτεινούσης πλευρᾶς εἶδος ἴσον ἐστὶ τοῖς ἀπὸ τῶν side subtending the right-angle is equal to the (sum of
τὴν ὀρθὴν γωνίαν περιεχουσῶν πλευρῶν εἴδεσι τοῖς ὁμοίοις the) similar, and similarly described, figures on the sides
τε καὶ ὁμοίως ἀναγραφομένοις. surrounding the right-angle.
Α
Β Γ ∆ D
A
B C
῎Εστω τρίγωνον ὀρθογώνιον τὸ ΑΒΓ ὀρθὴν ἔχον τὴν Let ABC be a right-angled triangle having the angle
ὑπὸ ΒΑΓ γωνίαν· λέγω, ὅτι τὸ ἀπὸ τῆς ΒΓ εἶδος ἴσον ἐστὶ BAC a right-angle. I say that the figure (drawn) on BC is
τοῖς ἀπὸ τῶν ΒΑ, ΑΓ εἴδεσι τοῖς ὁμοίοις τε καὶ ὁμοίως equal to the (sum of the) similar, and similarly described,
ἀναγραφομένοις. figures on BA and AC.
῎Ηχθω κάθετος ἡ ΑΔ. Let the perpendicular AD have been drawn [Prop.
᾿Επεὶ οὖν ἐν ὀρθογωνίῳ τριγώνῳ τῷ ΑΒΓ ἀπὸ τῆς πρὸς 1.12].
τῷ Α ὀρθῆς γωνίας ἐπὶ τὴν ΒΓ βάσιν κάθετος ἦκται ἡ ΑΔ, Therefore, since, in the right-angled triangle ABC,
τὰ ΑΒΔ, ΑΔΓ πρὸς τῇ καθέτῳ τρίγωνα ὅμοιά ἐστι τῷ τε the (straight-line) AD has been drawn from the rightὅλῳ τῷ ΑΒΓ καὶ ἀλλήλοις. καὶ ἐπεὶ ὅμοιόν ἐστι τὸ ΑΒΓ τῷ angle at A perpendicular to the base BC, the trianΑΒΔ, ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς ἡ ΓΒ πρὸς τὴν ΒΑ, οὕτως ἡ ΑΒ πρὸς gles ABD and ADC about the perpendicular are simτὴν ΒΔ. καὶ ἐπεὶ τρεῖς εὐθεῖαι ἀνάλογόν εἰσιν, ἔστιν ὡς ἡ ilar to the whole (triangle) ABC, and to one another
πρώτη πρὸς τὴν τρίτην, οὕτως τὸ ἀπὸ τῆς πρώτης εἶδος πρὸς [Prop. 6.8]. And since ABC is similar to ABD, thus
189
STOIQEIWN þ. ELEMENTS BOOK 6
τὸ ἀπὸ τῆς δευτέρας τὸ ὅμοιον καὶ ὁμοίως ἀναγραφόμενον. as CB is to BA, so AB (is) to BD [Def. 6.1]. And
ὡς ἄρα ἡ ΓΒ πρὸς τὴν ΒΔ, οὕτως τὸ ἀπὸ τῆς ΓΒ εἶδος since three straight-lines are proportional, as the first is
πρὸς τὸ ἀπὸ τῆς ΒΑ τὸ ὅμοιον καὶ ὁμοίως ἀναγραφόμενον. to the third, so the figure (drawn) on the first is to the
διὰ τὰ αὐτὰ δὴ καὶ ὡς ἡ ΒΓ πρὸς τὴν ΓΔ, οὕτως τὸ ἀπὸ τῆς similar, and similarly described, (figure) on the second
ΒΓ εἶδος πρὸς τὸ ἀπὸ τῆς ΓΑ. ὥστε καὶ ὡς ἡ ΒΓ πρὸς τὰς [Prop. 6.19 corr.]. Thus, as CB (is) to BD, so the figΒΔ, ΔΓ, οὕτως τὸ ἀπὸ τῆς ΒΓ εἶδος πρὸς τὰ ἀπὸ τῶν ΒΑ, ure (drawn) on CB (is) to the similar, and similarly deΑΓ τὰ ὅμοια καὶ ὁμοίως ἀναγραφόμενα. ἴση δὲ ἡ ΒΓ ταῖς scribed, (figure) on BA. And so, for the same (reasons),
ΒΔ, ΔΓ· ἴσον ἄρα καὶ τὸ ἄπὸ τῆς ΒΓ εἶδος τοῖς ἀπὸ τῶν as BC (is) to CD, so the figure (drawn) on BC (is) to
ΒΑ, ΑΓ εἴδεσι τοῖς ὁμοίοις τε καὶ ὁμοίως ἀναγραφομένοις. the (figure) on CA. Hence, also, as BC (is) to BD and
᾿Εν ἄρα τοῖς ὀρθογωνίοις τριγώνοις τὸ ἀπὸ τῆς τὴν DC, so the figure (drawn) on BC (is) to the (sum of the)
ὀρθὴν γωνίαν ὑποτεινούσης πλευρᾶς εἶδος ἴσον ἐστὶ τοῖς similar, and similarly described, (figures) on BA and AC
ἀπὸ τῶν τὴν ὀρθὴν γωνίαν περιεχουσῶν πλευρῶν εἴδεσι τοῖς [Prop. 5.24]. And BC is equal to BD and DC. Thus, the
ὁμοίοις τε καὶ ὁμοίως ἀναγραφομένοις· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. figure (drawn) on BC (is) also equal to the (sum of the)
similar, and similarly described, figures on BA and AC
[Prop. 5.9].
Thus, in right-angled triangles, the figure (drawn) on
the side subtending the right-angle is equal to the (sum of
the) similar, and similarly described, figures on the sides
surrounding the right-angle. (Which is) the very thing it
was required to show.
lbþ. Proposition 32
᾿Εὰν δύο τρίγωνα συντεθῇ κατὰ μίαν γωνίαν τὰς δύο If two triangles, having two sides proportional to two
πλευρὰς ταῖς δυσὶ πλευραῖς ἀνάλογον ἔχοντα ὥστε τὰς sides, are placed together at a single angle such that the
ὁμολόγους αὐτῶν πλευρὰς καὶ παραλλήλους εἶναι, αἱ λοιπαὶ corresponding sides are also parallel, then the remaining
τῶν τριγώνων πλευραὶ ἐπ᾿ εὐθείας ἔσονται. sides of the triangles will be straight-on (with respect to
one another).
Β Ε Γ
∆
Α
B E C
A
D
῎Εστω δύο τρίγωνα τὰ ΑΒΓ, ΔΓΕ τὰς δύο πλευρὰς τὰς Let ABC and DCE be two triangles having the two
ΒΑ, ΑΓ ταῖς δυσὶ πλευραῖς ταῖς ΔΓ, ΔΕ ἀνάλογον ἔχοντα, sides BA and AC proportional to the two sides DC and
ὡς μὲν τὴν ΑΒ πρὸς τὴν ΑΓ, οὕτως τὴν ΔΓ πρὸς τὴν ΔΕ, DE—so that as AB (is) to AC, so DC (is) to DE—and
παράλληλον δὲ τὴν μὲν ΑΒ τῇ ΔΓ, τὴν δὲ ΑΓ τῇ ΔΕ· λέγω, (having side) AB parallel to DC, and AC to DE. I say
ὅτι ἐπ᾿ εὐθείας ἐστὶν ἡ ΒΓ τῇ ΓΕ. that (side) BC is straight-on to CE.
᾿Επεὶ γὰρ παράλληλός ἐστιν ἡ ΑΒ τῇ ΔΓ, καὶ εἰς αὐτὰς For since AB is parallel to DC, and the straight-line
ἐμπέπτωκεν εὐθεῖα ἡ ΑΓ, αἱ ἐναλλὰξ γωνίαι αἱ ὑπὸ ΒΑΓ, AC has fallen across them, the alternate angles BAC and
ΑΓΔ ἴσαι ἀλλήλαις εἰσίν. διὰ τὰ αὐτὰ δὴ καὶ ἡ ὑπὸ ΓΔΕ τῇ ACD are equal to one another [Prop. 1.29]. So, for the
ὑπὸ ΑΓΔ ἴση ἐστίν. ὥστε καὶ ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΑΓ τῇ ὑπὸ ΓΔΕ ἐστιν same (reasons), CDE is also equal to ACD. And, hence,
ἴση. καὶ ἐπεὶ δύο τρίγωνά ἐστι τὰ ΑΒΓ, ΔΓΕ μίαν γωνίαν BAC is equal to CDE. And since ABC and DCE are
τὴν πρὸς τῷ Α μιᾷ γωνίᾳ τῇ πρὸς τῷ Δ ἴσην ἔχοντα, περὶ two triangles having the one angle at A equal to the one
190
STOIQEIWN þ. ELEMENTS BOOK 6
δὲ τὰς ἴσας γωνίας τὰς πλευρὰς ἀνάλογον, ὡς τὴν ΒΑ πρὸς angle at D, and the sides about the equal angles proτὴν ΑΓ, οὕτως τὴν ΓΔ πρὸς τὴν ΔΕ, ἰσογώνιον ἄρα ἐστὶ portional, (so that) as BA (is) to AC, so CD (is) to
τὸ ΑΒΓ τρίγωνον τῷ ΔΓΕ τριγώνῳ· ἴση ἄρα ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΒΓ DE, triangle ABC is thus equiangular to triangle DCE
γωνία τῇ ὑπὸ ΔΓΕ. ἐδείχθη δὲ καὶ ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΓΔ τῇ ὑπὸ ΒΑΓ [Prop. 6.6]. Thus, angle ABC is equal to DCE. And (anἴση· ὅλη ἄρα ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΓΕ δυσὶ ταῖς ὑπὸ ΑΒΓ, ΒΑΓ ἴση ἐστίν. gle) ACD was also shown (to be) equal to BAC. Thus,
κοινὴ προσκείσθω ἡ ὑπὸ ΑΓΒ· αἱ ἄρα ὑπὸ ΑΓΕ, ΑΓΒ ταῖς the whole (angle) ACE is equal to the two (angles) ABC
ὑπὸ ΒΑΓ, ΑΓΒ, ΓΒΑ ἴσαι εἰσίν. ἀλλ᾿ αἱ ὑπὸ ΒΑΓ, ΑΒΓ, and BAC. Let ACB have been added to both. Thus,
ΑΓΒ δυσὶν ὀρθαῖς ἴσαι εἰσίν· καὶ αἱ ὑπὸ ΑΓΕ, ΑΓΒ ἄρα ACE and ACB are equal to BAC, ACB, and CBA.
δυσὶν ὀρθαῖς ἴσαι εἰσίν. πρὸς δή τινι εὐθείᾳ τῇ ΑΓ καὶ τῷ But, BAC, ABC, and ACB are equal to two right-angles
πρὸς αὐτῇ σημείῳ τῷ Γ δύο εὐθεῖαι αἱ ΒΓ, ΓΕ μὴ ἐπὶ τὰ [Prop. 1.32]. Thus, ACE and ACB are also equal to two
αὐτὰ μέρη κείμεναι τὰς ἐφεξῆς γωνάις τὰς ὑπὸ ΑΓΕ, ΑΓΒ right-angles. Thus, the two straight-lines BC and CE,
δυσὶν ὀρθαῖς ἴσας ποιοῦσιν· ἐπ᾿ εὐθείας ἄρα ἐστὶν ἡ ΒΓ τῇ not lying on the same side, make adjacent angles ACE
ΓΕ. and ACB (whose sum is) equal to two right-angles with
᾿Εὰν ἄρα δύο τρίγωνα συντεθῇ κατὰ μίαν γωνίαν τὰς some straight-line AC, at the point C on it. Thus, BC is
δύο πλευρὰς ταῖς δυσὶ πλευραῖς ἀνάλογον ἔχοντα ὥστε τὰς straight-on to CE [Prop. 1.14].
ὁμολόγους αὐτῶν πλευρὰς καὶ παραλλήλους εἶναι, αἱ λοιπαὶ Thus, if two triangles, having two sides proportional
τῶν τριγώνων πλευραὶ ἐπ᾿ εὐθείας ἔσονται· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. to two sides, are placed together at a single angle such
that the corresponding sides are also parallel, then the
remaining sides of the triangles will be straight-on (with
respect to one another). (Which is) the very thing it was
required to show.
lgþ. Proposition 33
᾿Εν τοῖς ἴσοις κύκλοις αἱ γωνίαι τὸν αὐτὸν ἔχουσι In equal circles, angles have the same ratio as the (raλόγον ταῖς περιφερείαις, ἐφ᾿ ὧν βεβήκασιν, ἐάν τε πρὸς tio of the) circumferences on which they stand, whether
τοῖς κέντροις ἐάν τε πρὸς ταῖς περιφερείαις ὦσι βεβηκυῖαι. they are standing at the centers (of the circles) or at the
circumferences.
Z
L
H
K M
J
A
D
N
B
G
E
H
L
K M
A
D
N
B
E
G
C
F
῎Εστωσαν ἴσοι κύκλοι οἱ ΑΒΓ, ΔΕΖ, καὶ πρὸς μὲν τοῖς Let ABC and DEF be equal circles, and let BGC and
κέντροις αὐτῶν τοῖς Η, Θ γωνίαι ἔστωσαν αἱ ὑπὸ ΒΗΓ, EHF be angles at their centers, G and H (respectively),
ΕΘΖ, πρὸς δὲ ταῖς περιφερείαις αἱ ὑπὸ ΒΑΓ, ΕΔΖ· λέγω, and BAC and EDF (angles) at their circumferences. I
ὅτι ἐστὶν ὡς ἡ ΒΓ περιφέρεια πρὸς τὴν ΕΖ περιφέρειαν, say that as circumference BC is to circumference EF, so
οὕτως ἥ τε ὑπὸ ΒΗΓ γωνία πρὸς τὴν ὑπὸ ΕΘΖ καὶ ἡ ὑπὸ angle BGC (is) to EHF, and (angle) BAC to EDF.
ΒΑΓ πρὸς τὴν ὑπὸ ΕΔΖ. For let any number whatsoever of consecutive (cirΚείσθωσαν γὰρ τῇ μὲν ΒΓ περιφερείᾳ ἴσαι κατὰ τὸ ἑξῆς cumferences), CK and KL, be made equal to circumferὁσαιδηποτοῦν αἱ ΓΚ, ΚΛ, τῇ δὲ ΕΖ περιφερείᾳ ἴσαι ὁσαι- ence BC, and any number whatsoever, FM and MN, to
δηποτοῦν αἱ ΖΜ, ΜΝ, καὶ ἐπεζεύχθωσαν αἱ ΗΚ, ΗΛ, ΘΜ, circumference EF. And let GK, GL, HM, and HN have
ΘΝ. been joined.
᾿Επεὶ οὖν ἴσαι εἰσὶν αἱ ΒΓ, ΓΚ, ΚΛ περιφέρειαι ἀλλήλαις, Therefore, since circumferences BC, CK, and KL are
ἴσαι εἰσὶ καὶ αἱ ὑπὸ ΒΗΓ, ΓΗΚ, ΚΗΛ γωνίαι ἀλλήλαις· equal to one another, angles BGC, CGK, and KGL are
ὁσαπλασίων ἄρα ἐστὶν ἡ ΒΛ περιφέρεια τῆς ΒΓ, τοσαυτα- also equal to one another [Prop. 3.27]. Thus, as many
πλασίων ἐστὶ καὶ ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΗΛ γωνία τῆς ὑπὸ ΒΗΓ. διὰ τὰ times as circumference BL is (divisible) by BC, so many
191
STOIQEIWN þ. ELEMENTS BOOK 6
αὐτὰ δὴ καὶ ὁσαπλασίων ἐστὶν ἡ ΝΕ περιφέρεια τῆς ΕΖ, το- times is angle BGL also (divisible) by BGC. And so, for
σαυταπλασίων ἐστὶ καὶ ἡ ὑπὸ ΝΘΕ γωνία τῆς ὑπὸ ΕΘΖ. εἰ the same (reasons), as many times as circumference NE
ἄρα ἴση ἐστὶν ἡ ΒΛ περιφέρεια τῇ ΕΝ περιφερείᾳ, ἴση ἐστὶ is (divisible) by EF, so many times is angle NHE also
καὶ γωνία ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΗΛ τῇ ὑπὸ ΕΘΝ, καὶ εἰ μείζων ἐστὶν ἡ ΒΛ (divisible) by EHF. Thus, if circumference BL is equal
περιφέρεια τῆς ΕΝ περιφερείας, μείζων ἐστὶ καὶ ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΗΛ to circumference EN then angle BGL is also equal to
γωνία τῆς ὑπὸ ΕΘΝ, καὶ εἰ ἐλάσσων, ἐλάσσων. τεσσάρων EHN [Prop. 3.27], and if circumference BL is greater
δὴ ὄντων μεγεθῶν, δύο μὲν περιφερειῶν τῶν ΒΓ, ΕΖ, δύο than circumference EN then angle BGL is also greater
δὲ γωνιῶν τῶν ὑπὸ ΒΗΓ, ΕΘΖ, εἴληπται τῆς μὲν ΒΓ περι- than EHN,
† and if (BL is) less (than EN then BGL is
φερείας καὶ τῆς ὑπὸ ΒΗΓ γωνίας ἰσάκις πολλαπλασίων ἥ τε also) less (than EHN). So there are four magnitudes,
ΒΛ περιφέρεια καὶ ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΗΛ γωνία, τῆς δὲ ΕΖ περιφερείας two circumferences BC and EF, and two angles BGC
καὶ τῆς ὑπὸ ΕΘΖ γωνίας ἥ τε ΕΝ περιφέρια καὶ ἡ ὑπὸ ΕΘΝ and EHF. And equal multiples have been taken of cirγωνία. καὶ δέδεικται, ὅτι εἰ ὑπερέχει ἡ ΒΛ περιφέρεια τῆς cumference BC and angle BGC, (namely) circumference
ΕΝ περιφερείας, ὑπερέχει καὶ ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΗΛ γωνία τῆς ὑπο BL and angle BGL, and of circumference EF and anΕΘΝ γωνίας, καὶ εἰ ἴση, ἴση, καὶ εἰ ἐλάσσων, ἐλάσσων. gle EHF, (namely) circumference EN and angle EHN.
ἔστιν ἄρα, ὡς ἡ ΒΓ περιφέρεια πρὸς τὴν ΕΖ, οὕτως ἡ ὑπὸ And it has been shown that if circumference BL exceeds
ΒΗΓ γωνία πρὸς τὴν ὑπὸ ΕΘΖ. ἀλλ᾿ ὡς ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΗΓ γωνία circumference EN then angle BGL also exceeds angle
πρὸς τὴν ὑπὸ ΕΘΖ, οὕτως ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΑΓ πρὸς τὴν ὑπὸ ΕΔΖ. EHN, and if (BL is) equal (to EN then BGL is also)
διπλασία γὰρ ἑκατέρα ἑκατέρας. καὶ ὡς ἄρα ἡ ΒΓ περιφέρεια equal (to EHN), and if (BL is) less (than EN then BGL
πρὸς τὴν ΕΖ περιφέρειαν, οὕτως ἥ τε ὑπὸ ΒΗΓ γωνία πρὸς is also) less (than EHN). Thus, as circumference BC
τὴν ὑπὸ ΕΘΖ καὶ ἡ ὑπὸ ΒΑΓ πρὸς τὴν ὑπὸ ΕΔΖ. (is) to EF, so angle BGC (is) to EHF [Def. 5.5]. But as
᾿Εν ἄρα τοῖς ἴσοις κύκλοις αἱ γωνίαι τὸν αὐτὸν ἔχουσι angle BGC (is) to EHF, so (angle) BAC (is) to EDF
λόγον ταῖς περιφερείαις, ἐφ᾿ ὧν βεβήκασιν, ἐάν τε πρὸς τοῖς [Prop. 5.15]. For the former (are) double the latter (reκέντροις ἐάν τε πρὸς ταῖς περιφερείαις ὦσι βεβηκυῖαι· ὅπερ spectively) [Prop. 3.20]. Thus, also, as circumference BC
ἔδει δεῖξαι. (is) to circumference EF, so angle BGC (is) to EHF,
and BAC to EDF.
Thus, in equal circles, angles have the same ratio as
the (ratio of the) circumferences on which they stand,
whether they are standing at the centers (of the circles)
or at the circumferences. (Which is) the very thing it was
required to show.
† This is a straight-forward generalization of Prop. 3.27
192
ELEMENTS BOOK 7
Elementary Number Theory†
†The propositions contained in Books 7–9 are generally attributed to the school of Pythagoras.
193
STOIQEIWN zþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 7
VOroi. Definitions
αʹ. Μονάς ἐστιν, καθ᾿ ἣν ἕκαστον τῶν ὄντων ἓν λέγεται. 1. A unit is (that) according to which each existing
βʹ. ᾿Αριθμὸς δὲ τὸ ἐκ μονάδων συγκείμενον πλῆθος. (thing) is said (to be) one.
γʹ. Μέρος ἐστὶν ἀριθμὸς ἀριθμοῦ ὁ ἐλάσσων τοῦ 2. And a number (is) a multitude composed of units.†
μείζονος, ὅταν καταμετρῇ τὸν μείζονα. 3. A number is part of a(nother) number, the lesser of
δʹ. Μέρη δέ, ὅταν μὴ καταμετρῇ. the greater, when it measures the greater.‡
εʹ. Πολλαπλάσιος δὲ ὁ μείζων τοῦ ἐλάσσονος, ὅταν κα- 4. But (the lesser is) parts (of the greater) when it
ταμετρῆται ὑπὸ τοῦ ἐλάσσονος. does not measure it.§
ϛʹ. ῎Αρτιος ἀριθμός ἐστιν ὁ δίχα διαιρούμενος. 5. And the greater (number is) a multiple of the lesser
ζʹ. Περισσὸς δὲ ὁ μὴ διαιρούμενος δίχα ἢ [ὁ] μονάδι when it is measured by the lesser.
διαφέρων ἀρτίου ἀριθμοῦ. 6. An even number is one (which can be) divided in
ηʹ. ᾿Αρτιάκις ἄρτιος ἀριθμός ἐστιν ὁ ὑπὸ ἀρτίου ἀριθμοῦ half.
μετρούμενος κατὰ ἄρτιον ἀριθμόν. 7. And an odd number is one (which can)not (be)
θʹ. ῎Αρτιάκις δὲ περισσός ἐστιν ὁ ὑπὸ ἀρτίου ἀριθμοῦ divided in half, or which differs from an even number by
μετρούμενος κατὰ περισσὸν ἀριθμόν. a unit.
ιʹ. Περισσάκις δὲ περισσὸς ἀριθμός ἐστιν ὁ ὑπὸ περισσοῦ 8. An even-times-even number is one (which is) meaἀριθμοῦ μετρούμενος κατὰ περισσὸν ἀριθμόν. sured by an even number according to an even number.¶
ιαʹ. Πρῶτος ἀριθμός ἐστιν ὁ μονάδι μόνῃ μετρούμενος. 9. And an even-times-odd number is one (which
ιβʹ. Πρῶτοι πρὸς ἀλλήλους ἀριθμοί εἰσιν οἱ μονάδι μόνῃ is) measured by an even number according to an odd
μετρούμενοι κοινῷ μέτρῳ. number.∗
ιγʹ. Σύνθετος ἀριθμός ἐστιν ὁ ἀριθμῷ τινι μετρούμενος. 10. And an odd-times-odd number is one (which
ιδʹ. Σύνθετοι δὲ πρὸς ἀλλήλους ἀριθμοί εἰσιν οἱ ἀριθμῷ is) measured by an odd number according to an odd
τινι μετρούμενοι κοινῷ μέτρῳ. number.$
ιεʹ. ᾿Αριθμὸς ἀριθμὸν πολλαπλασιάζειν λέγεται, ὅταν, 11. A primek number is one (which is) measured by a
ὅσαι εἰσὶν ἐν αὐτῷ μονάδες, τοσαυτάκις συντεθῇ ὁ πολ- unit alone.
λαπλασιαζόμενος, καὶ γένηταί τις. 12. Numbers prime to one another are those (which
ιϛʹ. ῞Οταν δὲ δύο ἀριθμοὶ πολλαπλασιάσαντες ἀλλήλους are) measured by a unit alone as a common measure.
ποιῶσί τινα, ὁ γενόμενος ἐπίπεδος καλεῖται, πλευραὶ δὲ 13. A composite number is one (which is) measured
αὐτοῦ οἱ πολλαπλασιάσαντες ἀλλήλους ἀριθμοί. by some number.
ιζʹ. ῞Οταν δὲ τρεῖς ἀριθμοὶ πολλαπλασιάσαντες ἀλλήλους 14. And numbers composite to one another are those
ποιῶσί τινα, ὁ γενόμενος στερεός ἐστιν, πλευραὶ δὲ αὐτοῦ (which are) measured by some number as a common
οἱ πολλαπλασιάσαντες ἀλλήλους ἀριθμοί. measure.
ιηʹ. Τετράγωνος ἀριθμός ἐστιν ὁ ἰσάκις ἴσος ἢ [ὁ] ὑπὸ 15. A number is said to multiply a(nother) number
δύο ἴσων ἀριθμῶν περιεχόμενος. when the (number being) multiplied is added (to itself)
ιθʹ. Κύβος δὲ ὁ ἰσάκις ἴσος ἰσάκις ἢ [ὁ] ὑπὸ τριῶν ἴσων as many times as there are units in the former (number),
ἀριθμῶν περιεχόμενος. and (thereby) some (other number) is produced.
κʹ. ᾿Αριθμοὶ ἀνάλογόν εἰσιν, ὅταν ὁ πρῶτος τοῦ δευτέρου 16. And when two numbers multiplying one another
καὶ ὁ τρίτος τοῦ τετάρτου ἰσάκις ᾖ πολλαπλάσιος ἢ τὸ αὐτὸ make some (other number) then the (number so) creμέρος ἢ τὰ αὐτὰ μέρη ὦσιν. ated is called plane, and its sides (are) the numbers which
καʹ. ῞Ομοιοι ἐπίπεδοι καὶ στερεοὶ ἀριθμοί εἰσιν οἱ multiply one another.
ανάλογον ἔχοντες τὰς πλευράς. 17. And when three numbers multiplying one another
κβʹ. Τέλειος ἀριθμός ἐστιν ὁ τοῖς ἑαυτοῦ μέρεσιν ἴσος make some (other number) then the (number so) created
ὤν. is (called) solid, and its sides (are) the numbers which
multiply one another.
18. A square number is an equal times an equal, or (a
plane number) contained by two equal numbers.
19. And a cube (number) is an equal times an equal
times an equal, or (a solid number) contained by three
equal numbers.
194
STOIQEIWN zþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 7
20. Numbers are proportional when the first is the
same multiple, or the same part, or the same parts, of
the second that the third (is) of the fourth.
21. Similar plane and solid numbers are those having
proportional sides.
22. A perfect number is that which is equal to its own
parts.††
†
In other words, a “number” is a positive integer greater than unity.
‡
In other words, a number a is part of another number b if there exists some number n such that n a = b.
§
In other words, a number a is parts of another number b (where a < b) if there exist distinct numbers, m and n, such that n a = m b.
¶ In other words. an even-times-even number is the product of two even numbers.
∗ In other words, an even-times-odd number is the product of an even and an odd number.
$
In other words, an odd-times-odd number is the product of two odd numbers.
k Literally, “first”.
†† In other words, a perfect number is equal to the sum of its own factors.
aþ. Proposition 1
Δύο ἀριθμῶν ἀνίσων ἐκκειμένων, ἀνθυφαιρουμένου δὲ Two unequal numbers (being) laid down, and the
ἀεὶ τοῦ ἐλάσσονος ἀπὸ τοῦ μείζονος, ἐὰν ὁ λειπόμενος lesser being continually subtracted, in turn, from the
μηδέποτε καταμετρῇ τὸν πρὸ ἑαυτοῦ, ἕως οὗ λειφθῇ μονάς, greater, if the remainder never measures the (number)
οἱ ἐξ ἀρχῆς ἀριθμοὶ πρῶτοι πρὸς ἀλλὴλους ἔσονται. preceding it, until a unit remains, then the original numbers will be prime to one another.
Ε
Θ
Α
Ζ Γ
Η
Β ∆
E
G
A
H
F
B D
C
Δύο γὰρ [ἀνίσων] ἀριθμῶν τῶν ΑΒ, ΓΔ ἀνθυφαι- For two [unequal] numbers, AB and CD, the lesser
ρουμένου ἀεὶ τοῦ ἐλάσσονος ἀπὸ τοῦ μείζονος ὁ λειπόμενος being continually subtracted, in turn, from the greater,
μηδέποτε καταμετρείτω τὸν πρὸ ἑαυτοῦ, ἕως οὗ λειφθῇ let the remainder never measure the (number) preceding
μονάς· λέγω, ὅτι οἱ ΑΒ, ΓΔ πρῶτοι πρὸς ἀλλήλους εἰσίν, it, until a unit remains. I say that AB and CD are prime
τουτέστιν ὅτι τοὺς ΑΒ, ΓΔ μονὰς μόνη μετρεῖ. to one another—that is to say, that a unit alone measures
Εἰ γὰρ μή εἰσιν οἱ ΑΒ, ΓΔ πρῶτοι πρὸς ἀλλήλους, (both) AB and CD.
μετρήσει τις αὐτοὺς ἀριθμός. μετρείτω, καὶ ἔστω ὁ Ε· καὶ ὁ For if AB and CD are not prime to one another then
μὲν ΓΔ τὸν ΒΖ μετρῶν λειπέτω ἑαυτοῦ ἐλάσσονα τὸν ΖΑ, some number will measure them. Let (some number)
ὁ δὲ ΑΖ τὸν ΔΗ μετρῶν λειπέτω ἑαυτοῦ ἐλάσσονα τὸν ΗΓ, measure them, and let it be E. And let CD measuring
ὁ δὲ ΗΓ τὸν ΖΘ μετρῶν λειπέτω μονάδα τὴν ΘΑ. BF leave FA less than itself, and let AF measuring DG
᾿Επεὶ οὖν ὁ Ε τὸν ΓΔ μετρεῖ, ὁ δὲ ΓΔ τὸν ΒΖ μετρεῖ, leave GC less than itself, and let GC measuring FH leave
καὶ ὁ Ε ἄρα τὸν ΒΖ μετρεῖ· μετρεῖ δὲ καὶ ὅλον τὸν ΒΑ· a unit, HA.
καὶ λοιπὸν ἄρα τὸν ΑΖ μετρήσει. ὁ δὲ ΑΖ τὸν ΔΗ μετρεῖ· In fact, since E measures CD, and CD measures BF,
καὶ ὁ Ε ἄρα τὸν ΔΗ μετρεῖ· μετρεῖ δὲ καὶ ὅλον τὸν ΔΓ· E thus also measures BF.
† And (E) also measures the
καὶ λοιπὸν ἄρα τὸν ΓΗ μετρήσει. ὁ δὲ ΓΗ τὸν ΖΘ μετρεῖ· whole of BA. Thus, (E) will also measure the remainder
195
STOIQEIWN zþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 7
καὶ ὁ Ε ἄρα τὸν ΖΘ μετρεῖ· μετρεῖ δὲ καὶ ὅλον τὸν ΖΑ· AF.
‡ And AF measures DG. Thus, E also measures DG.
καὶ λοιπὴν ἄρα τὴν ΑΘ μονάδα μετρήσει ἀριθμὸς ὤν· ὅπερ And (E) also measures the whole of DC. Thus, (E) will
ἐστὶν ἀδύνατον. οὐκ ἄρα τοὺς ΑΒ, ΓΔ ἀριθμοὺς μετρήσει also measure the remainder CG. And CG measures FH.
τις ἀριθμός· οἱ ΑΒ, ΓΔ ἄρα πρῶτοι πρὸς ἀλλήλους εἰσίν· Thus, E also measures FH. And (E) also measures the
ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. whole of FA. Thus, (E) will also measure the remaining
unit AH, (despite) being a number. The very thing is
impossible. Thus, some number does not measure (both)
the numbers AB and CD. Thus, AB and CD are prime
to one another. (Which is) the very thing it was required
to show.
† Here, use is made of the unstated common notion that if a measures b, and b measures c, then a also measures c, where all symbols denote
numbers.
‡ Here, use is made of the unstated common notion that if a measures b, and a measures part of b, then a also measures the remainder of b, where
all symbols denote numbers.
bþ. Proposition 2
Δύο ἀριθμῶν δοθέντων μὴ πρώτων πρὸς ἀλλήλους τὸ To find the greatest common measure of two given
μέγιστον αὐτῶν κοινὸν μέτρον εὑρεῖν. numbers (which are) not prime to one another.
∆
Η
Α
Ε
Β
Γ
Ζ
B
G
F
A
E C
D
῎Εστωσαν οἱ δοθέντες δύο ἀριθμοὶ μὴ πρῶτοι πρὸς Let AB and CD be the two given numbers (which
ἀλλήλους οἱ ΑΒ, ΓΔ. δεῖ δὴ τῶν ΑΒ, ΓΔ τὸ μέγιστον κοινὸν are) not prime to one another. So it is required to find
μέτρον εὑρεῖν. the greatest common measure of AB and CD.
Εἰ μὲν οὖν ὁ ΓΔ τὸν ΑΒ μετρεῖ, μετρεῖ δὲ καὶ ἑαυτόν, ὁ In fact, if CD measures AB, CD is thus a common
ΓΔ ἄρα τῶν ΓΔ, ΑΒ κοινὸν μέτρον ἐστίν. καὶ φανερόν, ὅτι measure of CD and AB, (since CD) also measures itself.
καὶ μέγιστον· οὐδεὶς γὰρ μείζων τοῦ ΓΔ τὸν ΓΔ μετρήσει. And (it is) manifest that (it is) also the greatest (comΕἰ δὲ οὐ μετρεῖ ὁ ΓΔ τὸν ΑΒ, τῶν ΑΒ, ΓΔ ἀνθυφαι- mon measure). For nothing greater than CD can meaρουμένου ἀεὶ τοῦ ἐλάσσονος ἀπὸ τοῦ μείζονος λειφθήσεταί sure CD.
τις ἀριθμός, ὃς μετρήσει τὸν πρὸ ἑαυτοῦ. μονὰς μὲν But if CD does not measure AB then some number
γὰρ οὐ λειφθήσεται· εἰ δὲ μή, ἔσονται οἱ ΑΒ, ΓΔ πρῶτοι will remain from AB and CD, the lesser being continπρὸς ἀλλήλους· ὅπερ οὐχ ὑπόκειται. λειφθήσεταί τις ἄρα ually subtracted, in turn, from the greater, which will
ἀριθμὸς, ὃς μετρήσει τὸν πρὸ ἑαυτοῦ. καὶ ὁ μὲν ΓΔ τὸν measure the (number) preceding it. For a unit will not be
ΒΕ μετρῶν λειπέτω ἑαυτοῦ ἐλάσσονα τὸν ΕΑ, ὁ δὲ ΕΑ τὸν left. But if not, AB and CD will be prime to one another
ΔΖ μετρῶν λειπέτω ἑαυτοῦ ἐλάσσονα τὸν ΖΓ, ὁ δὲ ΓΖ τὸν [Prop. 7.1]. The very opposite thing was assumed. Thus,
ΑΕ μετρείτω. ἐπεὶ οὖν ὁ ΓΖ τὸν ΑΕ μετρεῖ, ὁ δὲ ΑΕ τὸν some number will remain which will measure the (numΔΖ μετρεῖ, καὶ ὁ ΓΖ ἄρα τὸν ΔΖ μετρήσει. μετρεῖ δὲ καὶ ber) preceding it. And let CD measuring BE leave EA
ἑαυτόν· καὶ ὅλον ἄρα τὸν ΓΔ μετρήσει. ὁ δὲ ΓΔ τὸν ΒΕ less than itself, and let EA measuring DF leave FC less
μετρεῖ· καὶ ὁ ΓΖ ἄρα τὸν ΒΕ μετρεῖ· μετρεῖ δὲ καὶ τὸν ΕΑ· than itself, and let CF measure AE. Therefore, since CF
καὶ ὅλον ἄρα τὸν ΒΑ μετρήσει· μετρεῖ δὲ καὶ τὸν ΓΔ· ὁ ΓΖ measures AE, and AE measures DF, CF will thus also
ἄρα τοὺς ΑΒ, ΓΔ μετρεῖ. ὁ ΓΖ ἄρα τῶν ΑΒ, ΓΔ κοινὸν measure DF. And it also measures itself. Thus, it will
196
STOIQEIWN zþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 7
μέτρον ἐστίν. λέγω δή, ὅτι καὶ μέγιστον. εἰ γὰρ μή ἐστιν ὁ also measure the whole of CD. And CD measures BE.
ΓΖ τῶν ΑΒ, ΓΔ μέγιστον κοινὸν μέτρον, μετρήσει τις τοὺς Thus, CF also measures BE. And it also measures EA.
ΑΒ, ΓΔ ἀριθμοὺς ἀριθμὸς μείζων ὢν τοῦ ΓΖ. μετρείτω, Thus, it will also measure the whole of BA. And it also
καὶ ἔστω ὁ Η. καὶ ἐπεὶ ὁ Η τὸν ΓΔ μετρεῖ, ὁ δὲ ΓΔ τὸν measures CD. Thus, CF measures (both) AB and CD.
ΒΕ μετρεῖ, καὶ ὁ Η ἄρα τὸν ΒΕ μετρεῖ· μετρεῖ δὲ καὶ ὅλον Thus, CF is a common measure of AB and CD. So I say
τὸν ΒΑ· καὶ λοιπὸν ἄρα τὸν ΑΕ μετρήσει. ὁ δὲ ΑΕ τὸν that (it is) also the greatest (common measure). For if
ΔΖ μετρεῖ· καὶ ὁ Η ἄρα τὸν ΔΖ μετρήσει· μετρεῖ δὲ καὶ CF is not the greatest common measure of AB and CD
ὅλον τὸν ΔΓ· καὶ λοιπὸν ἄρα τὸν ΓΖ μετρήσει ὁ μείζων then some number which is greater than CF will meaτὸν ἐλάσσονα· ὅπερ ἐστὶν ἀδύνατον· οὐκ ἄρα τοὺς ΑΒ, ΓΔ sure the numbers AB and CD. Let it (so) measure (AB
ἀριθμοὺς ἀριθμός τις μετρήσει μείζων ὢν τοῦ ΓΖ· ὁ ΓΖ ἄρα and CD), and let it be G. And since G measures CD,
τῶν ΑΒ, ΓΔ μέγιστόν ἐστι κοινὸν μέτρον [ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι]. and CD measures BE, G thus also measures BE. And it
also measures the whole of BA. Thus, it will also measure the remainder AE. And AE measures DF. Thus, G
will also measure DF. And it also measures the whole
of DC. Thus, it will also measure the remainder CF,
the greater (measuring) the lesser. The very thing is impossible. Thus, some number which is greater than CF
cannot measure the numbers AB and CD. Thus, CF is
the greatest common measure of AB and CD. [(Which
is) the very thing it was required to show].
Pìrisma. Corollary
᾿Εκ δὴ τούτου φανερόν, ὅτι ἐὰν ἀριθμὸς δύο ἀριθμοὺς So it is manifest, from this, that if a number measures
μετρῇ, καὶ τὸ μέγιστον αὐτῶν κοινὸν μέτρον μετρήσει· ὅπερ two numbers then it will also measure their greatest comἔδει δεῖξαι. mon measure. (Which is) the very thing it was required
to show.
gþ. Proposition 3
Τριῶν ἀριθμῶν δοθέντων μὴ πρώτων πρὸς ἀλλήλους τὸ To find the greatest common measure of three given
μέγιστον αὐτῶν κοινὸν μέτρον εὑρεῖν. numbers (which are) not prime to one another.
Α Β Γ ∆ Ε Ζ A B C D E F
῎Εστωσαν οἱ δοθέντες τρεῖς ἀριθμοὶ μὴ πρῶτοι πρὸς Let A, B, and C be the three given numbers (which
ἀλλήλους οἱ Α, Β, Γ· δεῖ δὴ τῶν Α, Β, Γ τὸ μέγιστον κοινὸν are) not prime to one another. So it is required to find
μέτρον εὑρεῖν. the greatest common measure of A, B, and C.
Εἰλήφθω γὰρ δύο τῶν Α, Β τὸ μέγιστον κοινὸν μέτρον ὁ For let the greatest common measure, D, of the two
Δ· ὁ δὴ Δ τὸν Γ ἤτοι μετρεῖ ἢ οὐ μετρεῖ. μετρείτω πρότερον· (numbers) A and B have been taken [Prop. 7.2]. So D
μετρεῖ δέ καὶ τοὺς Α, Β· ὁ Δ ἄρα τοὺς Α, Β, Γ μετρεῖ· ὁ either measures, or does not measure, C. First of all, let
Δ ἄρα τῶν Α, Β, Γ κοινὸν μέτρον ἐστίν. λέγω δή, ὅτι καὶ it measure (C). And it also measures A and B. Thus, D
197
STOIQEIWN zþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 7
μέγιστον. εἰ γὰρ μή ἐστιν ὁ Δ τῶν Α, Β, Γ μέγιστον κοινὸν measures A, B, and C. Thus, D is a common measure
μέτρον, μετρήσει τις τοὺς Α, Β, Γ ἀριθμοὺς ἀριθμὸς μείζων of A, B, and C. So I say that (it is) also the greatest
ὢν τοῦ Δ. μετρείτω, καὶ ἔστω ὁ Ε. ἐπεὶ οὖν ὁ Ε τοὺς Α, Β, (common measure). For if D is not the greatest common
Γ μετρεῖ, καὶ τοὺς Α, Β ἄρα μετρήσει· καὶ τὸ τῶν Α, Β ἄρα measure of A, B, and C then some number greater than
μέγιστον κοινὸν μέτρον μετρήσει. τὸ δὲ τῶν Α, Β μέγιστον D will measure the numbers A, B, and C. Let it (so)
κοινὸν μέτρον ἐστὶν ὁ Δ· ὁ Ε ἄρα τὸν Δ μετρεῖ ὁ μείζων measure (A, B, and C), and let it be E. Therefore, since
τὸν ἐλάσσονα· ὅπερ ἐστὶν ἀδύνατον. οὐκ ἄρα τοὺς Α, Β, Γ E measures A, B, and C, it will thus also measure A and
ἀριθμοὺς ἀριθμός τις μετρήσει μείζων ὢν τοῦ Δ· ὁ Δ ἄρα B. Thus, it will also measure the greatest common meaτῶν Α, Β, Γ μέγιστόν ἐστι κοινὸν μέτρον. sure of A and B [Prop. 7.2 corr.]. And D is the greatest
Μὴ μετρείτω δὴ ὁ Δ τὸν Γ· λέγω πρῶτον, ὅτι οἱ Γ, Δ common measure of A and B. Thus, E measures D, the
οὔκ εἰσι πρῶτοι πρὸς ἀλλήλους. ἐπεὶ γὰρ οἱ Α, Β, Γ οὔκ greater (measuring) the lesser. The very thing is impossiεἰσι πρῶτοι πρὸς ἀλλήλους, μετρήσει τις αὐτοὺς ἀριθμός. ὁ ble. Thus, some number which is greater than D cannot
δὴ τοὺς Α, Β, Γ μετρῶν καὶ τοὺς Α, Β μετρήσει, καὶ τὸ measure the numbers A, B, and C. Thus, D is the greatτῶν Α, Β μέγιστον κοινὸν μέτρον τὸν Δ μετρήσει· μετρεῖ est common measure of A, B, and C.
δὲ καὶ τὸν Γ· τοὺς Δ, Γ ἄρα ἀριθμοὺς ἀριθμός τις μετρήσει· So let D not measure C. I say, first of all, that C
οἱ Δ, Γ ἄρα οὔκ εἰσι πρῶτοι πρὸς ἀλλήλους. εἰλήφθω οὖν and D are not prime to one another. For since A, B, C
αὐτῶν τὸ μέγιστον κοινὸν μέτρον ὁ Ε. καὶ ἐπεὶ ὁ Ε τὸν Δ are not prime to one another, some number will measure
μετρεῖ, ὁ δὲ Δ τοὺς Α, Β μετρεῖ, καὶ ὁ Ε ἄρα τοὺς Α, Β them. So the (number) measuring A, B, and C will also
μετρεῖ· μετρεῖ δὲ καὶ τὸν Γ· ὁ Ε ἄρα τοὺς Α, Β, Γ μετρεῖ. measure A and B, and it will also measure the greatest
ὁ Ε ἄρα τῶν Α, Β, Γ κοινόν ἐστι μέτρον. λέγω δή, ὅτι καὶ common measure, D, of A and B [Prop. 7.2 corr.]. And
μέγιστον. εἰ γὰρ μή ἐστιν ὁ Ε τῶν Α, Β, Γ τὸ μέγιστον it also measures C. Thus, some number will measure the
κοινὸν μέτρον, μετρήσει τις τοὺς Α, Β, Γ ἀριθμοὺς ἀριθμὸς numbers D and C. Thus, D and C are not prime to one
μείζων ὢν τοῦ Ε. μετρείτω, καὶ ἔστω ὁ Ζ. καὶ ἐπεὶ ὁ Ζ τοὺς another. Therefore, let their greatest common measure,
Α, Β, Γ μετρεῖ, καὶ τοὺς Α, Β μετρεῖ· καὶ τὸ τῶν Α, Β ἄρα E, have been taken [Prop. 7.2]. And since E measures
μέγιστον κοινὸν μέτρον μετρήσει. τὸ δὲ τῶν Α, Β μέγιστον D, and D measures A and B, E thus also measures A
κοινὸν μέτρον ἐστὶν ὁ Δ· ὁ Ζ ἄρα τὸν Δ μετρεῖ· μετρεῖ δὲ and B. And it also measures C. Thus, E measures A, B,
καὶ τὸν Γ· ὁ Ζ ἄρα τοὺς Δ, Γ μετρεῖ· καὶ τὸ τῶν Δ, Γ ἄρα and C. Thus, E is a common measure of A, B, and C. So
μέγιστον κοινὸν μέτρον μετρήσει. τὸ δὲ τῶν Δ, Γ μέγιστον I say that (it is) also the greatest (common measure). For
κοινὸν μέτρον ἐστὶν ὁ Ε· ὁ Ζ ἄρα τὸν Ε μετρεῖ ὁ μείζων if E is not the greatest common measure of A, B, and C
τὸν ἐλάσσονα· ὅπερ ἐστὶν ἀδύνατον. οὐκ ἄρα τοὺς Α, Β, Γ then some number greater than E will measure the numἀριθμοὺς ἀριθμός τις μετρήσει μείζων ὢν τοῦ Ε· ὁ Ε ἄρα bers A, B, and C. Let it (so) measure (A, B, and C), and
τῶν Α, Β, Γ μέγιστόν ἐστι κοινὸν μέτρον· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. let it be F. And since F measures A, B, and C, it also
measures A and B. Thus, it will also measure the greatest common measure of A and B [Prop. 7.2 corr.]. And
D is the greatest common measure of A and B. Thus, F
measures D. And it also measures C. Thus, F measures
D and C. Thus, it will also measure the greatest common measure of D and C [Prop. 7.2 corr.]. And E is the
greatest common measure of D and C. Thus, F measures
E, the greater (measuring) the lesser. The very thing is
impossible. Thus, some number which is greater than E
does not measure the numbers A, B, and C. Thus, E is
the greatest common measure of A, B, and C. (Which
is) the very thing it was required to show.
dþ. Proposition 4
῞Απας ἀριθμὸς παντὸς ἀριθμοῦ ὁ ἐλάσσων τοῦ μείζονος Any number is either part or parts of any (other) numἤτοι μέρος ἐστὶν ἢ μέρη. ber, the lesser of the greater.
῎Εστωσαν δύο ἀριθμοὶ οἱ Α, ΒΓ, καὶ ἔστω ἐλάσσων ὁ Let A and BC be two numbers, and let BC be the
ΒΓ· λέγω, ὅτι ὁ ΒΓ τοῦ Α ἤτοι μέρος ἐστὶν ἢ μέρη. lesser. I say that BC is either part or parts of A.
198
STOIQEIWN zþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 7
Οἱ Α, ΒΓ γὰρ ἤτοι πρῶτοι πρὸς ἀλλήλους εἰσὶν ἢ οὔ. For A and BC are either prime to one another, or not.
ἔστωσαν πρότερον οἱ Α, ΒΓ πρῶτοι πρὸς ἀλλήλους. διαι- Let A and BC, first of all, be prime to one another. So
ρεθέντος δὴ τοῦ ΒΓ εἰς τὰς ἐν αὐτῷ μονάδας ἔσται ἑκάστη separating BC into its constituent units, each of the units
μονὰς τῶν ἐν τῷ ΒΓ μέρος τι τοῦ Α· ὥστε μέρη ἐστὶν ὁ ΒΓ in BC will be some part of A. Hence, BC is parts of A.
τοῦ Α.
Ε
Ζ
Γ
Β
Α ∆ D
C
F
E
B
A
Μὴ ἔστωσαν δὴ οἱ Α, ΒΓ πρῶτοι πρὸς ἀλλήλους· ὁ δὴ So let A and BC be not prime to one another. So BC
ΒΓ τὸν Α ἤτοι μετρεῖ ἢ οὐ μετρεῖ. εἰ μὲν οὖν ὁ ΒΓ τὸν either measures, or does not measure, A. Therefore, if
Α μετρεῖ, μέρος ἐστὶν ὁ ΒΓ τοῦ Α. εἰ δὲ οὔ, εἰλήφθω τῶν BC measures A then BC is part of A. And if not, let the
Α, ΒΓ μέγιστον κοινὸν μέτρον ὁ Δ, καὶ διῃρήσθω ὁ ΒΓ εἰς greatest common measure, D, of A and BC have been
τοὺς τῷ Δ ἴσους τοὺς ΒΕ, ΕΖ, ΖΓ. καὶ ἐπεὶ ὁ Δ τὸν Α taken [Prop. 7.2], and let BC have been divided into BE,
μετρεῖ, μέρος ἐστὶν ὁ Δ τοῦ Α· ἴσος δὲ ὁ Δ ἑκάστῳ τῶν EF, and FC, equal to D. And since D measures A, D is
ΒΕ, ΕΖ, ΖΓ· καὶ ἕκαστος ἄρα τῶν ΒΕ, ΕΖ, ΖΓ τοῦ Α μέρος a part of A. And D is equal to each of BE, EF, and FC.
ἐστίν· ὥστε μέρη ἐστὶν ὁ ΒΓ τοῦ Α. Thus, BE, EF, and FC are also each part of A. Hence,
῞Απας ἄρα ἀριθμὸς παντὸς ἀριθμοῦ ὁ ἐλάσσων τοῦ BC is parts of A.
μείζονος ἤτοι μέρος ἐστὶν ἢ μέρη· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. Thus, any number is either part or parts of any (other)
number, the lesser of the greater. (Which is) the very
thing it was required to show.
eþ. Proposition 5†
᾿Εὰν ἀριθμὸς ἀριθμοῦ μέρος ᾖ, καὶ ἕτερος ἑτέρου τὸ If a number is part of a number, and another (numαὐτὸ μέρος ᾖ, καὶ συναμφότερος συναμφοτέρου τὸ αὐτὸ ber) is the same part of another, then the sum (of the
μέρος ἔσται, ὅπερ ὁ εἷς τοῦ ἑνός. leading numbers) will also be the same part of the sum
(of the following numbers) that one (number) is of another.
∆
Γ
Η
Β
Ζ
Θ
Ε
Α D
C
G
B
F
H
E
A
᾿Αριθμὸς γὰρ ὁ Α [ἀριθμοῦ] τοῦ ΒΓ μέρος ἔστω, καὶ For let a number A be part of a [number] BC, and
199
STOIQEIWN zþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 7
ἕτερος ὁ Δ ἑτέρου τοῦ ΕΖ τὸ αὐτὸ μέρος, ὅπερ ὁ Α τοῦ another (number) D (be) the same part of another (numΒΓ· λέγω, ὅτι καὶ συναμφότερος ὁ Α, Δ συναμφοτέρου τοῦ ber) EF that A (is) of BC. I say that the sum A, D is also
ΒΓ, ΕΖ τὸ αὐτὸ μέρος ἐστίν, ὅπερ ὁ Α τοῦ ΒΓ. the same part of the sum BC, EF that A (is) of BC.
᾿Επεὶ γάρ, ὃ μέρος ἐστὶν ὁ Α τοῦ ΒΓ, τὸ αὐτὸ μέρος ἐστὶ For since which(ever) part A is of BC, D is the same
καὶ ὁ Δ τοῦ ΕΖ, ὅσοι ἄρα εἰσὶν ἐν τῷ ΒΓ ἀριθμοὶ ἴσοι τῷ part of EF, thus as many numbers as are in BC equal
Α, τοσοῦτοί εἰσι καὶ ἐν τῷ ΕΖ ἀριθμοὶ ἴσοι τῷ Δ. διῇρήσθω to A, so many numbers are also in EF equal to D. Let
ὁ μὲν ΒΓ εἰς τοὺς τῷ Α ἴσους τοὺς ΒΗ, ΗΓ, ὁ δὲ ΕΖ εἰς BC have been divided into BG and GC, equal to A, and
τοὺς τῷ Δ ἴσους τοὺς ΕΘ, ΘΖ· ἔσται δὴ ἴσον τὸ πλῆθος EF into EH and HF, equal to D. So the multitude of
τῶν ΒΗ, ΗΓ τῷ πλήθει τῶν ΕΘ, ΘΖ. καὶ ἐπεὶ ἴσος ἐστὶν (divisions) BG, GC will be equal to the multitude of (diὁ μὲν ΒΗ τῷ Α, ὁ δὲ ΕΘ τῷ Δ, καὶ οἱ ΒΗ, ΕΘ ἄρα τοῖς visions) EH, HF. And since BG is equal to A, and EH
Α, Δ ἴσοι. διὰ τὰ αὐτὰ δὴ καὶ οἱ ΗΓ, ΘΖ τοῖς Α, Δ. ὅσοι to D, thus BG, EH (is) also equal to A, D. So, for the
ἄρα [εἰσὶν] ἐν τῷ ΒΓ ἀριθμοὶ ἴσοι τῷ Α, τοσοῦτοί εἰσι καὶ same (reasons), GC, HF (is) also (equal) to A, D. Thus,
ἐν τοῖς ΒΓ, ΕΖ ἴσοι τοῖς Α, Δ. ὁσαπλασίων ἄρα ἐστὶν ὁ ΒΓ as many numbers as [are] in BC equal to A, so many are
τοῦ Α, τοσαυταπλασίων ἐστὶ καὶ συναμφότερος ὁ ΒΓ, ΕΖ also in BC, EF equal to A, D. Thus, as many times as
συναμφοτέρου τοῦ Α, Δ. ὃ ἄρα μέρος ἐστὶν ὁ Α τοῦ ΒΓ, τὸ BC is (divisible) by A, so many times is the sum BC, EF
αὐτὸ μέρος ἐστὶ καὶ συναμφότερος ὁ Α, Δ συναμφοτέρου also (divisible) by the sum A, D. Thus, which(ever) part
τοῦ ΒΓ, ΕΖ· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. A is of BC, the sum A, D is also the same part of the
sum BC, EF. (Which is) the very thing it was required
to show.
†
In modern notation, this proposition states that if a = (1/n) b and c = (1/n) d then (a + c) = (1/n) (b + d), where all symbols denote numbers.
þ. Proposition 6†
᾿Εὰν ἀριθμὸς ἀριθμοῦ μέρη ᾖ, καὶ ἕτερος ἑτέρου τὰ If a number is parts of a number, and another (numαὐτὰ μέρη ᾖ, καὶ συναμφότερος συναμφοτέρου τὰ αὐτὰ ber) is the same parts of another, then the sum (of the
μέρη ἔσται, ὅπερ ὁ εἷς τοῦ ἑνός. leading numbers) will also be the same parts of the sum
(of the following numbers) that one (number) is of another.
Ε
Θ
∆
Η
Α
Β
Γ Ζ E
G
A
C
D
H
F
B
᾿Αριθμὸς γὰρ ὁ ΑΒ ἀριθμοῦ τοῦ Γ μέρη ἔστω, καὶ ἕτερος For let a number AB be parts of a number C, and anὁ ΔΕ ἑτέρου τοῦ Ζ τὰ αὐτὰ μέρη, ἅπερ ὁ ΑΒ τοῦ Γ· λέγω, other (number) DE (be) the same parts of another (numὅτι καὶ συναμφότερος ὁ ΑΒ, ΔΕ συναμφοτέρου τοῦ Γ, Ζ ber) F that AB (is) of C. I say that the sum AB, DE is
τὰ αὐτὰ μέρη ἐστίν, ἅπερ ὁ ΑΒ τοῦ Γ. also the same parts of the sum C, F that AB (is) of C.
᾿Επεὶ γάρ, ἃ μέρη ἐστὶν ὁ ΑΒ τοῦ Γ, τὰ αὐτὰ μέρη καὶ For since which(ever) parts AB is of C, DE (is) also
ὁ ΔΕ τοῦ Ζ, ὅσα ἄρα ἐστὶν ἐν τῷ ΑΒ μέρη τοῦ Γ, τοσαῦτά the same parts of F, thus as many parts of C as are in AB,
ἐστι καὶ ἐν τῷ ΔΕ μέρη τοῦ Ζ. διῃρήσθω ὁ μὲν ΑΒ εἰς τὰ so many parts of F are also in DE. Let AB have been
τοῦ Γ μέρη τὰ ΑΗ, ΗΒ, ὁ δὲ ΔΕ εἰς τὰ τοῦ Ζ μέρη τὰ divided into the parts of C, AG and GB, and DE into the
ΔΘ, ΘΕ· ἔσται δὴ ἴσον τὸ πλῆθος τῶν ΑΗ, ΗΒ τῷ πλήθει parts of F, DH and HE. So the multitude of (divisions)
τῶν ΔΘ, ΘΕ. καὶ ἐπεί, ὃ μέρος ἐστὶν ὁ ΑΗ τοῦ Γ, τὸ AG, GB will be equal to the multitude of (divisions) DH,
200
STOIQEIWN zþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 7
αὑτὸ μέρος ἐστὶ καὶ ὁ ΔΘ τοῦ Ζ, ὃ ἄρα μέρος ἐστὶν ὁ ΑΗ HE. And since which(ever) part AG is of C, DH is also
τοῦ Γ, τὸ αὐτὸ μέρος ἐστὶ καὶ συναμφότερος ὁ ΑΗ, ΔΘ the same part of F, thus which(ever) part AG is of C,
συναμφοτέρου τοῦ Γ, Ζ. διὰ τὰ αὐτὰ δὴ καὶ ὃ μέρος ἐστὶν ὁ the sum AG, DH is also the same part of the sum C, F
ΗΒ τοῦ Γ, τὸ αὐτὸ μέρος ἐστὶ καὶ συναμφότερος ὁ ΗΒ, ΘΕ [Prop. 7.5]. And so, for the same (reasons), which(ever)
συναμφοτέρου τοῦ Γ, Ζ. ἃ ἄρα μέρη ἐστὶν ὁ ΑΒ τοῦ Γ, τὰ part GB is of C, the sum GB, HE is also the same part
αὐτὰ μέρη ἐστὶ καὶ συναμφότερος ὁ ΑΒ, ΔΕ συναμφοτέρου of the sum C, F. Thus, which(ever) parts AB is of C,
τοῦ Γ, Ζ· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. the sum AB, DE is also the same parts of the sum C, F.
(Which is) the very thing it was required to show.
†
In modern notation, this proposition states that if a = (m/n) b and c = (m/n) d then (a + c) = (m/n) (b + d), where all symbols denote
numbers.
zþ. Proposition 7†
᾿Εὰν ἀριθμὸς ἀριθμοῦ μέρος ᾖ, ὅπερ ἀφαιρεθεὶς ἀφαι- If a number is that part of a number that a (part)
ρεθέντος, καὶ ὁ λοιπὸς τοῦ λοιποῦ τὸ αὐτὸ μέρος ἔσται, taken away (is) of a (part) taken away then the remainὅπερ ὁ ὅλος τοῦ ὅλου. der will also be the same part of the remainder that the
whole (is) of the whole.
Η
Α
Γ Ζ ∆
Ε Β A E
G C D F
B
᾿Αριθμὸς γὰρ ὁ ΑΒ ἀριθμοῦ τοῦ ΓΔ μέρος ἔστω, ὅπερ For let a number AB be that part of a number CD
ἀφαιρεθεὶς ὁ ΑΕ ἀφαιρεθέντος τοῦ ΓΖ· λέγω, ὅτι καὶ λοιπὸς that a (part) taken away AE (is) of a part taken away
ὁ ΕΒ λοιποῦ τοῦ ΖΔ τὸ αὐτὸ μέρος ἐστίν, ὅπερ ὅλος ὁ ΑΒ CF. I say that the remainder EB is also the same part of
ὅλου τοῦ ΓΔ. the remainder FD that the whole AB (is) of the whole
῝Ο γὰρ μέρος ἐστὶν ὁ ΑΕ τοῦ ΓΖ, τὸ αὐτὸ μέρος ἔστω CD.
καὶ ὁ ΕΒ τοῦ ΓΗ. καὶ ἐπεί, ὃ μέρος ἐστὶν ὁ ΑΕ τοῦ ΓΖ, τὸ For which(ever) part AE is of CF, let EB also be the
αὐτὸ μέρος ἐστὶ καὶ ὁ ΕΒ τοῦ ΓΗ, ὃ ἄρα μέρος ἐστὶν ὁ ΑΕ same part of CG. And since which(ever) part AE is of
τοῦ ΓΖ, τὸ αὐτὸ μέρος ἐστὶ καὶ ὁ ΑΒ τοῦ ΗΖ. ὃ δὲ μέρος CF, EB is also the same part of CG, thus which(ever)
ἐστὶν ὁ ΑΕ τοῦ ΓΖ, τὸ αὐτὸ μέρος ὑπόκειται καὶ ὁ ΑΒ τοῦ part AE is of CF, AB is also the same part of GF
ΓΔ· ὃ ἄρα μέρος ἐστὶ καὶ ὁ ΑΒ τοῦ ΗΖ, τὸ αὐτὸ μέρος ἐστὶ [Prop. 7.5]. And which(ever) part AE is of CF, AB is
καὶ τοῦ ΓΔ· ἴσος ἄρα ἐστὶν ὁ ΗΖ τῷ ΓΔ. κοινὸς ἀφῃρήσθω also assumed (to be) the same part of CD. Thus, also,
ὁ ΓΖ· λοιπὸς ἄρα ὁ ΗΓ λοιπῷ τῷ ΖΔ ἐστιν ἴσος. καὶ ἐπεί, which(ever) part AB is of GF, (AB) is also the same
ὃ μέρος ἐστὶν ὁ ΑΕ τοῦ ΓΖ, τὸ αὐτὸ μέρος [ἐστὶ] καὶ ὁ ΕΒ part of CD. Thus, GF is equal to CD. Let CF have been
τοῦ ΗΓ, ἴσος δὲ ὁ ΗΓ τῷ ΖΔ, ὃ ἄρα μέρος ἐστὶν ὁ ΑΕ τοῦ subtracted from both. Thus, the remainder GC is equal
ΓΖ, τὸ αὐτὸ μέρος ἐστὶ καὶ ὁ ΕΒ τοῦ ΖΔ. ἀλλὰ ὃ μέρος to the remainder FD. And since which(ever) part AE is
ἐστὶν ὁ ΑΕ τοῦ ΓΖ, τὸ αὐτὸ μέρος ἐστὶ καὶ ὁ ΑΒ τοῦ ΓΔ· of CF, EB [is] also the same part of GC, and GC (is)
καὶ λοιπὸς ἄρα ὁ ΕΒ λοιποῦ τοῦ ΖΔ τὸ αὐτὸ μέρος ἐστίν, equal to FD, thus which(ever) part AE is of CF, EB is
ὅπερ ὅλος ὁ ΑΒ ὅλου τοῦ ΓΔ· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. also the same part of FD. But, which(ever) part AE is of
CF, AB is also the same part of CD. Thus, the remainder EB is also the same part of the remainder FD that
the whole AB (is) of the whole CD. (Which is) the very
thing it was required to show.
†
In modern notation, this proposition states that if a = (1/n) b and c = (1/n) d then (a − c) = (1/n) (b − d), where all symbols denote numbers.
hþ. Proposition 8†
᾿Εὰν ἀριθμὸς ἀριθμοῦ μέρη ᾖ, ἅπερ ἀφαιρεθεὶς ἀφαι- If a number is those parts of a number that a (part)
ρεθέντος, καὶ ὁ λοιπὸς τοῦ λοιποῦ τὰ αὐτὰ μέρη ἔσται, taken away (is) of a (part) taken away then the remainἅπερ ὁ ὅλος τοῦ ὅλου. der will also be the same parts of the remainder that the
201
STOIQEIWN zþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 7
whole (is) of the whole.
Β
Η
Α Λ Ε
Ν
Γ Ζ ∆
Μ Κ Θ
C
A E
F
G K M N
L B
H
D
᾿Αριθμὸς γὰρ ὁ ΑΒ ἀριθμοῦ τοῦ ΓΔ μέρη ἔστω, ἅπερ For let a number AB be those parts of a number CD
ἀφαιρεθεὶς ὁ ΑΕ ἀφαιρεθέντος τοῦ ΓΖ· λέγω, ὅτι καὶ λοιπὸς that a (part) taken away AE (is) of a (part) taken away
ὁ ΕΒ λοιποῦ τοῦ ΖΔ τὰ αὐτὰ μέρη ἐστίν, ἅπερ ὅλος ὁ ΑΒ CF. I say that the remainder EB is also the same parts
ὅλου τοῦ ΓΔ. of the remainder FD that the whole AB (is) of the whole
Κείσθω γὰρ τῷ ΑΒ ἴσος ὁ ΗΘ, ἃ ἄρα μέρη ἐστὶν ὁ ΗΘ CD.
τοῦ ΓΔ, τὰ αὐτὰ μέρη ἐστὶ καὶ ὁ ΑΕ τοῦ ΓΖ. διῃρήσθω ὁ For let GH be laid down equal to AB. Thus,
μὲν ΗΘ εἰς τὰ τοῦ ΓΔ μέρη τὰ ΗΚ, ΚΘ, ὁ δὲ ΑΕ εἰς τὰ τοῦ which(ever) parts GH is of CD, AE is also the same
ΓΖ μέρη τὰ ΑΛ, ΛΕ· ἔσται δὴ ἴσον τὸ πλῆθος τῶν ΗΚ, ΚΘ parts of CF. Let GH have been divided into the parts
τῷ πλήθει τῶν ΑΛ, ΛΕ. καὶ ἐπεί, ὃ μέρος ἐστὶν ὁ ΗΚ τοῦ of CD, GK and KH, and AE into the part of CF, AL
ΓΔ, τὸ αὐτὸ μέρος ἐστὶ καὶ ὁ ΑΛ τοῦ ΓΖ, μείζων δὲ ὁ ΓΔ and LE. So the multitude of (divisions) GK, KH will be
τοῦ ΓΖ, μείζων ἄρα καὶ ὁ ΗΚ τοῦ ΑΛ. κείσθω τῷ ΑΛ ἴσος equal to the multitude of (divisions) AL, LE. And since
ὁ ΗΜ. ὃ ἄρα μέρος ἐστὶν ὁ ΗΚ τοῦ ΓΔ, τὸ αὐτὸ μέρος ἐστὶ which(ever) part GK is of CD, AL is also the same part
καὶ ὁ ΗΜ τοῦ ΓΖ· καὶ λοιπὸς ἄρα ὁ ΜΚ λοιποῦ τοῦ ΖΔ of CF, and CD (is) greater than CF, GK (is) thus also
τὸ αὐτὸ μέρος ἐστίν, ὅπερ ὅλος ὁ ΗΚ ὅλου τοῦ ΓΔ. πάλιν greater than AL. Let GM be made equal to AL. Thus,
ἐπεί, ὃ μέρος ἐστὶν ὁ ΚΘ τοῦ ΓΔ, τὸ αὐτὸ μέρος ἐστὶ καὶ ὁ which(ever) part GK is of CD, GM is also the same part
ΕΛ τοῦ ΓΖ, μείζων δὲ ὁ ΓΔ τοῦ ΓΖ, μείζων ἄρα καὶ ὁ ΘΚ of CF. Thus, the remainder MK is also the same part of
τοῦ ΕΛ. κείσθω τῷ ΕΛ ἴσος ὁ ΚΝ. ὃ ἄρα μέρος ἐστὶν ὁ ΚΘ the remainder FD that the whole GK (is) of the whole
τοῦ ΓΔ, τὸ αὐτὸ μέρος ἐστὶ καὶ ὁ ΚΝ τοῦ ΓΖ· καὶ λοιπὸς CD [Prop. 7.5]. Again, since which(ever) part KH is of
ἄρα ὁ ΝΘ λοιποῦ τοῦ ΖΔ τὸ αὐτὸ μέρος ἐστίν, ὅπερ ὅλος ὁ CD, EL is also the same part of CF, and CD (is) greater
ΚΘ ὅλου τοῦ ΓΔ. ἐδείχθη δὲ καὶ λοιπὸς ὁ ΜΚ λοιποῦ τοῦ than CF, HK (is) thus also greater than EL. Let KN be
ΖΔ τὸ αὐτὸ μέρος ὤν, ὅπερ ὅλος ὁ ΗΚ ὅλου τοῦ ΓΔ· καὶ made equal to EL. Thus, which(ever) part KH (is) of
συναμφότερος ἄρα ὁ ΜΚ, ΝΘ τοῦ ΔΖ τὰ αὐτὰ μέρη ἐστίν, CD, KN is also the same part of CF. Thus, the remainἅπερ ὅλος ὁ ΘΗ ὅλου τοῦ ΓΔ. ἴσος δὲ συναμφότερος μὲν der NH is also the same part of the remainder FD that
ὁ ΜΚ, ΝΘ τῷ ΕΒ, ὁ δὲ ΘΗ τῷ ΒΑ· καὶ λοιπὸς ἄρα ὁ ΕΒ the whole KH (is) of the whole CD [Prop. 7.5]. And the
λοιποῦ τοῦ ΖΔ τὰ αὐτὰ μέρη ἐστίν, ἅπερ ὅλος ὁ ΑΒ ὅλου remainder MK was also shown to be the same part of
τοῦ ΓΔ· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. the remainder FD that the whole GK (is) of the whole
CD. Thus, the sum MK, NH is the same parts of DF
that the whole HG (is) of the whole CD. And the sum
MK, NH (is) equal to EB, and HG to BA. Thus, the
remainder EB is also the same parts of the remainder
FD that the whole AB (is) of the whole CD. (Which is)
the very thing it was required to show.
†
In modern notation, this proposition states that if a = (m/n) b and c = (m/n) d then (a − c) = (m/n) (b − d), where all symbols denote
numbers.
jþ. Proposition 9†
᾿Εὰν ἀριθμὸς ἀριθμοῦ μέρος ᾖ, καὶ ἕτερος ἑτέρου τὸ If a number is part of a number, and another (numαὐτὸ μέρος ᾖ, καὶ ἐναλλάξ, ὃ μέρος ἐστὶν ἢ μέρη ὁ πρῶτος ber) is the same part of another, also, alternately,
τοῦ τρίτου, τὸ αὐτὸ μέρος ἔσται ἢ τὰ αὐτὰ μέρη καὶ ὁ which(ever) part, or parts, the first (number) is of the
δεύτερος τοῦ τετάρτου. third, the second (number) will also be the same part, or
202
STOIQEIWN zþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 7
the same parts, of the fourth.
Β
Ε
Θ
Ζ
Α ∆
Γ
Η
F
A
C
G
B
D
E
H
᾿Αριθμὸς γὰρ ὁ Α ἀριθμοῦ τοῦ ΒΓ μέρος ἔστω, καὶ ἕτε- For let a number A be part of a number BC, and anρος ὁ Δ ἑτέρου τοῦ ΕΖ τὸ αὐτὸ μέρος, ὅπερ ὁ Α τοῦ ΒΓ· other (number) D (be) the same part of another EF that
λέγω, ὅτι καὶ ἐναλλάξ, ὃ μέρος ἐστὶν ὁ Α τοῦ Δ ἢ μέρη, τὸ A (is) of BC. I say that, also, alternately, which(ever)
αὐτὸ μέρος ἐστὶ καὶ ὁ ΒΓ τοῦ ΕΖ ἢ μέρη. part, or parts, A is of D, BC is also the same part, or
᾿Επεὶ γὰρ ὃ μέρος ἐστὶν ὁ Α τοῦ ΒΓ, τὸ αὐτὸ μέρος ἐστὶ parts, of EF.
καὶ ὁ Δ τοῦ ΕΖ, ὅσοι ἄρα εἰσὶν ἐν τῷ ΒΓ ἀριθμοὶ ἴσοι τῷ For since which(ever) part A is of BC, D is also the
Α, τοσοῦτοί εἰσι καὶ ἐν τῷ ΕΖ ἴσοι τῷ Δ. διῃρήσθω ὁ μὲν same part of EF, thus as many numbers as are in BC
ΒΓ εἰς τοὺς τῷ Α ἴσους τοὺς ΒΗ, ΗΓ, ὁ δὲ ΕΖ εἰς τοὺς τῷ equal to A, so many are also in EF equal to D. Let BC
Δ ἴσους τοὺς ΕΘ, ΘΖ· ἔσται δὴ ἴσον τὸ πλῆθος τῶν ΒΗ, have been divided into BG and GC, equal to A, and EF
ΗΓ τῷ πλήθει τῶν ΕΘ, ΘΖ. into EH and HF, equal to D. So the multitude of (diΚαὶ ἐπεὶ ἴσοι εἰσὶν οἱ ΒΗ, ΗΓ ἀριθμοὶ ἀλλήλοις, εἰσὶ visions) BG, GC will be equal to the multitude of (diviδὲ καὶ οἱ ΕΘ, ΘΖ ἀριθμοὶ ἴσοι ἀλλήλοις, καί ἐστιν ἴσον τὸ sions) EH, HF.
πλῆθος τῶν ΒΗ, ΗΓ τῷ πλήθει τῶν ΕΘ, ΘΖ, ὃ ἄρα μέρος And since the numbers BG and GC are equal to one
ἐστὶν ὁ ΒΗ τοῦ ΕΘ ἢ μέρη, τὸ αὐτὸ μέρος ἐστὶ καὶ ὁ ΗΓ another, and the numbers EH and HF are also equal to
τοῦ ΘΖ ἢ τὰ αὐτὰ μέρη· ὥστε καὶ ὃ μέρος ἐστὶν ὁ ΒΗ τοῦ one another, and the multitude of (divisions) BG, GC
ΕΘ ἢ μέρη, τὸ αὐτὸ μέρος ἐστὶ καὶ συναμφότερος ὁ ΒΓ is equal to the multitude of (divisions) EH, HC, thus
συναμφοτέρου τοῦ ΕΖ ἢ τὰ αὐτὰ μέρη. ἴσος δὲ ὁ μὲν ΒΗ which(ever) part, or parts, BG is of EH, GC is also
τῷ Α, ὁ δὲ ΕΘ τῷ Δ· ὃ ἄρα μέρος ἐστὶν ὁ Α τοῦ Δ ἢ μέρη, the same part, or the same parts, of HF. And hence,
τὸ αὐτὸ μέρος ἐστὶ καὶ ὁ ΒΓ τοῦ ΕΖ ἢ τὰ αὐτὰ μέρη· ὅπερ which(ever) part, or parts, BG is of EH, the sum BC
ἔδει δεῖξαι. is also the same part, or the same parts, of the sum EF
[Props. 7.5, 7.6]. And BG (is) equal to A, and EH to D.
Thus, which(ever) part, or parts, A is of D, BC is also
the same part, or the same parts, of EF. (Which is) the
very thing it was required to show.
†
In modern notation, this proposition states that if a = (1/n) b and c = (1/n) d then if a = (k/l) c then b = (k/l) d, where all symbols denote
numbers.
iþ. Proposition 10†
᾿Εὰν ἀριθμὸς ἀριθμοῦ μέρη ᾖ, καὶ ἕτερος ἑτέρου τὰ αὐτὰ If a number is parts of a number, and another (numμέρη ᾖ, καὶ ἐναλλάξ, ἃ μέρη ἐστὶν ὁ πρῶτος τοῦ τρίτου ἢ ber) is the same parts of another, also, alternately,
μέρος, τὰ αὐτὰ μέρη ἔσται καὶ ὁ δεύτερος τοῦ τετάρτου ἢ which(ever) parts, or part, the first (number) is of the
τὸ αὐτὸ μέρος. third, the second will also be the same parts, or the same
᾿Αριθμὸς γὰρ ὁ ΑΒ ἀριθμοῦ τοῦ Γ μέρη ἔστω, καὶ ἕτερος part, of the fourth.
ὁ ΔΕ ἑτέρου τοῦ Ζ τὰ αὐτὰ μέρη· λέγω, ὅτι καὶ ἐναλλάξ, For let a number AB be parts of a number C, and
ἃ μέρη ἐστὶν ὁ ΑΒ τοῦ ΔΕ ἢ μέρος, τὰ αὐτὰ μέρη ἐστὶ καὶ another (number) DE (be) the same parts of another F.
ὁ Γ τοῦ Ζ ἢ τὸ αὐτὸ μέρος. I say that, also, alternately, which(ever) parts, or part,
203
STOIQEIWN zþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 7
AB is of DE, C is also the same parts, or the same part,
of F.
Ζ
Η
Ε
Θ
∆
Α
Β
Γ
A
B
G
C
E
H
D
F
᾿Επεὶ γάρ, ἃ μέρη ἐστὶν ὁ ΑΒ τοῦ Γ, τὰ αὐτὰ μέρη ἐστὶ For since which(ever) parts AB is of C, DE is also
καὶ ὁ ΔΕ τοῦ Ζ, ὅσα ἄρα ἐστὶν ἐν τῷ ΑΒ μέρη τοῦ Γ, the same parts of F, thus as many parts of C as are in
τοσαῦτα καὶ ἐν τῷ ΔΕ μέρη τοῦ Ζ. διῃρήσθω ὁ μὲν ΑΒ εἰς AB, so many parts of F (are) also in DE. Let AB have
τὰ τοῦ Γ μέρη τὰ ΑΗ, ΗΒ, ὁ δὲ ΔΕ εἰς τὰ τοῦ Ζ μέρη τὰ been divided into the parts of C, AG and GB, and DE
ΔΘ, ΘΕ· ἔσται δὴ ἴσον τὸ πλῆθος τῶν ΑΗ, ΗΒ τῷ πλήθει into the parts of F, DH and HE. So the multitude of
τῶν ΔΘ, ΘΕ. καὶ ἐπεί, ὃ μέρος ἐστὶν ὁ ΑΗ τοῦ Γ, τὸ αὐτὸ (divisions) AG, GB will be equal to the multitude of (diμέρος ἐστὶ καὶ ὁ ΔΘ τοῦ Ζ, καὶ ἐναλλάξ, ὃ μέρος ἐστὶν ὁ visions) DH, HE. And since which(ever) part AG is
ΑΗ τοῦ ΔΘ ἢ μέρη, τὸ αὐτὸ μέρος ἐστὶ καὶ ὁ Γ τοῦ Ζ ἢ of C, DH is also the same part of F, also, alternately,
τὰ αὐτὰ μέρη. διὰ τὰ αὐτὰ δὴ καί, ὃ μέρος ἐστὶν ὁ ΗΒ τοῦ which(ever) part, or parts, AG is of DH, C is also the
ΘΕ ἢ μέρη, τὸ αὐτὸ μέρος ἐστὶ καὶ ὁ Γ τοῦ Ζ ἢ τὰ αὐτὰ same part, or the same parts, of F [Prop. 7.9]. And so,
μέρη· ὥστε καί [ὃ μέρος ἐστὶν ὁ ΑΗ τοῦ ΔΘ ἢ μέρη, τὸ for the same (reasons), which(ever) part, or parts, GB is
αὐτὸ μέρος ἐστὶ καὶ ὁ ΗΒ τοῦ ΘΕ ἢ τὰ αὐτὰ μέρη· καὶ ὃ of HE, C is also the same part, or the same parts, of F
ἄρα μέρος ἐστὶν ὁ ΑΗ τοῦ ΔΘ ἢ μέρη, τὸ αὐτὸ μέρος ἐστὶ [Prop. 7.9]. And so [which(ever) part, or parts, AG is of
καὶ ὁ ΑΒ τοῦ ΔΕ ἢ τὰ αὐτὰ μέρη· ἀλλ᾿ ὃ μέρος ἐστὶν ὁ ΑΗ DH, GB is also the same part, or the same parts, of HE.
τοῦ ΔΘ ἢ μέρη, τὸ αὐτὸ μέρος ἐδείχθη καὶ ὁ Γ τοῦ Ζ ἢ τὰ And thus, which(ever) part, or parts, AG is of DH, AB is
αὐτὰ μέρη, καὶ] ἃ [ἄρα] μέρη ἐστὶν ὁ ΑΒ τοῦ ΔΕ ἢ μέρος, also the same part, or the same parts, of DE [Props. 7.5,
τὰ αὐτὰ μέρη ἐστὶ καὶ ὁ Γ τοῦ Ζ ἢ τὸ αὐτὸ μέρος· ὅπερ ἔδει 7.6]. But, which(ever) part, or parts, AG is of DH, C
δεῖξαι. was also shown (to be) the same part, or the same parts,
of F. And, thus] which(ever) parts, or part, AB is of DE,
C is also the same parts, or the same part, of F. (Which
is) the very thing it was required to show.
†
In modern notation, this proposition states that if a = (m/n) b and c = (m/n) d then if a = (k/l) c then b = (k/l) d, where all symbols denote
numbers.
iaþ. Proposition 11
᾿Εαν ᾖ ὡς ὅλος πρὸς ὅλον, οὕτως ἀφαιρεθεὶς πρὸς ἀφαι- If as the whole (of a number) is to the whole (of anρεθέντα, καὶ ὁ λοιπὸς πρὸς τὸν λοιπὸν ἔσται, ὡς ὅλος πρὸς other), so a (part) taken away (is) to a (part) taken away,
ὅλον. then the remainder will also be to the remainder as the
῎Εστω ὡς ὅλος ὁ ΑΒ πρὸς ὅλον τὸν ΓΔ, οὕτως ἀφαι- whole (is) to the whole.
ρεθεὶς ὁ ΑΕ πρὸς ἀφαιρεθέντα τὸν ΓΖ· λέγω, ὅτι καὶ λοιπὸς Let the whole AB be to the whole CD as the (part)
ὁ ΕΒ πρὸς λοιπὸν τὸν ΖΔ ἐστιν, ὡς ὅλος ὁ ΑΒ πρὸς ὅλον taken away AE (is) to the (part) taken away CF. I say
τὸν ΓΔ. that the remainder EB is to the remainder FD as the
whole AB (is) to the whole CD.
204
STOIQEIWN zþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 7
Β ∆
Ε
Α
Γ
Ζ
A
F
E
C
B D
᾿Επεί ἐστιν ὡς ὁ ΑΒ πρὸς τὸν ΓΔ, οὕτως ὁ ΑΕ πρὸς (For) since as AB is to CD, so AE (is) to CF, thus
τὸν ΓΖ, ὃ ἄρα μέρος ἐστὶν ὁ ΑΒ τοῦ ΓΔ ἢ μέρη, τὸ αὐτὸ which(ever) part, or parts, AB is of CD, AE is also the
μέρος ἐστὶ καὶ ὁ ΑΕ τοῦ ΓΖ ἢ τὰ αὐτὰ μέρη. καὶ λοιπὸς same part, or the same parts, of CF [Def. 7.20]. Thus,
ἄρα ὁ ΕΒ λοιποῦ τοῦ ΖΔ τὸ αὐτὸ μέρος ἐστὶν ἢ μέρη, ἅπερ the remainder EB is also the same part, or parts, of the
ὁ ΑΒ τοῦ ΓΔ. ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς ὁ ΕΒ πρὸς τὸν ΖΔ, οὕτως ὁ remainder FD that AB (is) of CD [Props. 7.7, 7.8].
ΑΒ πρὸς τὸν ΓΔ· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. Thus, as EB is to FD, so AB (is) to CD [Def. 7.20].
(Which is) the very thing it was required to show.
†
In modern notation, this proposition states that if a : b :: c : d then a : b :: a − c : b − d, where all symbols denote numbers.
ibþ. Proposition 12†
᾿Εὰν ὦσιν ὁποσοιοῦν ἀριθμοὶ ἀνάλογον, ἔσται ὡς εἷς If any multitude whatsoever of numbers are proporτῶν ἡγουμένων πρὸς ἕνα τῶν ἑπομένων, οὕτως ἅπαντες οἱ tional then as one of the leading (numbers is) to one of
ἡγούμενοι πρὸς ἅπαντας τοὺς ἑπομένους. the following so (the sum of) all of the leading (numbers)
will be to (the sum of) all of the following.
Α Γ Β ∆ A B C D
῎Εστωσαν ὁποσοιοῦν ἀριθμοὶ ἀνάλογον οἱ Α, Β, Γ, Δ, Let any multitude whatsoever of numbers, A, B, C,
ὡς ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν Β, οὕτως ὁ Γ πρὸς τὸν Δ· λέγω, ὅτι ἐστὶν D, be proportional, (such that) as A (is) to B, so C (is)
ὡς ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν Β, οὕτως οἱ Α, Γ πρὸς τοὺς Β, Δ. to D. I say that as A is to B, so A, C (is) to B, D.
᾿Επεὶ γάρ ἐστιν ὡς ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν Β, οὕτως ὁ Γ πρὸς For since as A is to B, so C (is) to D, thus which(ever)
τὸν Δ, ὃ ἄρα μέρος ἐστὶν ὁ Α τοῦ Β ἢ μέρη, τὸ αὐτὸ μέρος part, or parts, A is of B, C is also the same part, or parts,
ἐστὶ καὶ ὁ Γ τοῦ Δ ἢ μέρη. καὶ συναμφότερος ἄρα ὁ Α, of D [Def. 7.20]. Thus, the sum A, C is also the same
Γ συναμφοτέρου τοῦ Β, Δ τὸ αὐτὸ μέρος ἐστὶν ἢ τὰ αὐτὰ part, or the same parts, of the sum B, D that A (is) of B
μέρη, ἅπερ ὁ Α τοῦ Β. ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν Β, οὕτως [Props. 7.5, 7.6]. Thus, as A is to B, so A, C (is) to B, D
οἱ Α, Γ πρὸς τοὺς Β, Δ· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. [Def. 7.20]. (Which is) the very thing it was required to
show.
205
STOIQEIWN zþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 7
†
In modern notation, this proposition states that if a : b :: c : d then a : b :: a + c : b + d, where all symbols denote numbers.
igþ. Proposition 13†
᾿Εὰν τέσσαρες ἀριθμοὶ ἀνάλογον ὦσιν, καὶ ἐναλλὰξ If four numbers are proportional then they will also
ἀνάλογον ἔσονται. be proportional alternately.
Α Γ Β ∆ A B C D
῎Εστωσαν τέσσαρες ἀριθμοὶ ἀνάλογον οἱ Α, Β, Γ, Δ, Let the four numbers A, B, C, and D be proportional,
ὡς ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν Β, οὕτως ὁ Γ πρὸς τὸν Δ· λέγω, ὅτι καὶ (such that) as A (is) to B, so C (is) to D. I say that they
ἐναλλὰξ ἀνάλογον ἔσονται, ὡς ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν Γ, οὕτως ὁ Β will also be proportional alternately, (such that) as A (is)
πρὸς τὸν Δ. to C, so B (is) to D.
᾿Επεὶ γάρ ἐστιν ὡς ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν Β, οὕτως ὁ Γ πρὸς τὸν For since as A is to B, so C (is) to D, thus which(ever)
Δ, ὃ ἄρα μέρος ἐστὶν ὁ Α τοῦ Β ἢ μέρη, τὸ αὐτὸ μέρος ἐστὶ part, or parts, A is of B, C is also the same part,
καὶ ὁ Γ τοῦ Δ ἢ τὰ αὐτὰ μέρη. ἐναλλὰξ ἄρα, ὃ μέρος ἐστὶν or the same parts, of D [Def. 7.20]. Thus, alterately,
ὁ Α τοῦ Γ ἢ μέρη, τὸ αὐτὸ μέρος ἐστὶ καὶ ὁ Β τοῦ Δ ἢ τὰ which(ever) part, or parts, A is of C, B is also the same
αὐτὰ μέρη. ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν Γ, οὕτως ὁ Β πρὸς part, or the same parts, of D [Props. 7.9, 7.10]. Thus, as
τὸν Δ· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. A is to C, so B (is) to D [Def. 7.20]. (Which is) the very
thing it was required to show.
†
In modern notation, this proposition states that if a : b :: c : d then a : c :: b : d, where all symbols denote numbers.
idþ. Proposition 14†
᾿Εὰν ὦσιν ὁποσοιοῦν ἀριθμοὶ καὶ ἄλλοι αὐτοῖς ἴσοι τὸ If there are any multitude of numbers whatsoever,
πλῆθος σύνδυο λαμβανόμενοι καὶ ἐν τῷ αὐτῷ λόγῳ, καὶ δι᾿ and (some) other (numbers) of equal multitude to them,
ἴσου ἐν τῷ αὐτῷ λόγῷ ἔσονται. (which are) also in the same ratio taken two by two, then
they will also be in the same ratio via equality.
Ζ
Α ∆
Β
Γ
Ε
F
A D
B
C
E
῎Εστωσαν ὁποσοιοῦν ἀριθμοὶ οἱ Α, Β, Γ καὶ ἄλλοι αὐτοῖς Let there be any multitude of numbers whatsoever, A,
ἴσοι τὸ πλῆθος σύνδυο λαμβανόμενοι ἐν τῷ αὐτῷ λόγῳ οἱ B, C, and (some) other (numbers), D, E, F, of equal
Δ, Ε, Ζ, ὡς μὲν ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν Β, οὕτως ὁ Δ πρὸς τὸν Ε, multitude to them, (which are) in the same ratio taken
ὡς δὲ ὁ Β πρὸς τὸν Γ, οὕτως ὁ Ε πρὸς τὸν Ζ· λέγω, ὅτι two by two, (such that) as A (is) to B, so D (is) to E,
καὶ δι᾿ ἴσου ἐστὶν ὡς ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν Γ, οὕτως ὁ Δ πρὸς τὸν and as B (is) to C, so E (is) to F. I say that also, via
Ζ. equality, as A is to C, so D (is) to F.
᾿Επεὶ γάρ ἐστιν ὡς ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν Β, οὕτως ὁ Δ πρὸς For since as A is to B, so D (is) to E, thus, alternately,
τὸν Ε, ἐναλλὰξ ἄρα ἐστὶν ὡς ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν Δ, οὕτως ὁ Β as A is to D, so B (is) to E [Prop. 7.13]. Again, since
πρὸς τὸν Ε. πάλιν, ἐπεί ἐστιν ὡς ὁ Β πρὸς τὸν Γ, οὕτως ὁ as B is to C, so E (is) to F, thus, alternately, as B is
206
STOIQEIWN zþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 7
Ε πρὸς τὸν Ζ, ἐναλλὰξ ἄρα ἐστὶν ὡς ὁ Β πρὸς τὸν Ε, οὕτως to E, so C (is) to F [Prop. 7.13]. And as B (is) to E,
ὁ Γ πρὸς τὸν Ζ. ὡς δὲ ὁ Β πρὸς τὸν Ε, οὕτως ὁ Α πρὸς so A (is) to D. Thus, also, as A (is) to D, so C (is) to F.
τὸν Δ· καὶ ὡς ἄρα ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν Δ, οὕτως ὁ Γ πρὸς τὸν Thus, alternately, as A is to C, so D (is) to F [Prop. 7.13].
Ζ· ἐναλλὰξ ἄρα ἐστὶν ὡς ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν Γ, οὕτως ὁ Δ πρὸς (Which is) the very thing it was required to show.
τὸν Ζ· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι.
†
In modern notation, this proposition states that if a : b :: d : e and b : c :: e : f then a : c :: d : f, where all symbols denote numbers.
ieþ. Proposition 15
᾿Εὰν μονὰς ἀριθμόν τινα μετρῇ, ἰσακις δὲ ἕτερος ἀριθμὸς If a unit measures some number, and another numἄλλον τινὰ ἀριθμὸν μετρῇ, καὶ ἐναλλὰξ ἰσάκις ἡ μονὰς τὸν ber measures some other number as many times, then,
τρίτον ἀριθμὸν μετρήσει καὶ ὁ δεύτερος τὸν τέταρτον. also, alternately, the unit will measure the third number as many times as the second (number measures) the
fourth.
Ζ
Α
∆
Β Η Θ Γ
Ε Κ Λ F
H
D
A
B
E
G C
K L
Μονὰς γὰρ ἡ Α ἀριθμόν τινα τὸν ΒΓ μετρείτω, ἰσάκις δὲ For let a unit A measure some number BC, and let
ἕτερος ἀριθμὸς ὁ Δ ἄλλον τινὰ ἀριθμὸν τὸν ΕΖ μετρείτω· another number D measure some other number EF as
λέγω, ὅτι καὶ ἐναλλὰξ ἰσάκις ἡ Α μονὰς τὸν Δ ἀριθμὸν many times. I say that, also, alternately, the unit A also
μετρεῖ καὶ ὁ ΒΓ τὸν ΕΖ. measures the number D as many times as BC (measures)
᾿Επεὶ γὰρ ἰσάκις ἡ Α μονὰς τὸν ΒΓ ἀριθμὸν μετρεῖ καὶ ὁ EF.
Δ τὸν ΕΖ, ὅσαι ἄρα εἰσὶν ἐν τῷ ΒΓ μονάδες, τοσοῦτοί εἰσι For since the unit A measures the number BC as
καὶ ἐν τῷ ΕΖ ἀριθμοὶ ἴσοι τῷ Δ. διῃρήσθω ὁ μὲν ΒΓ εἰς τὰς many times as D (measures) EF, thus as many units as
ἐν ἑαυτῷ μονάδας τὰς ΒΗ, ΗΘ, ΘΓ, ὁ δὲ ΕΖ εἰς τοὺς τῷ Δ are in BC, so many numbers are also in EF equal to
ἴσους τοὺς ΕΚ, ΚΛ, ΛΖ. ἔσται δὴ ἴσον τὸ πλῆθος τῶν ΒΗ, D. Let BC have been divided into its constituent units,
ΗΘ, ΘΓ τῷ πλήθει τῶν ΕΚ, ΚΛ, ΛΖ. καὶ ἐπεὶ ἴσαι εἰσὶν αἱ BG, GH, and HC, and EF into the (divisions) EK, KL,
ΒΗ, ΗΘ, ΘΓ μονάδες ἀλλήλαις, εἰσὶ δὲ καὶ οἱ ΕΚ, ΚΛ, ΛΖ and LF, equal to D. So the multitude of (units) BG,
ἀριθμοὶ ἴσοι ἀλλήλοις, καί ἐστιν ἴσον τὸ πλῆθος τῶν ΒΗ, GH, HC will be equal to the multitude of (divisions)
ΗΘ, ΘΓ μονάδων τῷ πλήθει τῶν ΕΚ, ΚΛ, ΛΖ ἀριθμῶν, EK, KL, LF. And since the units BG, GH, and HC
ἔσται ἄρα ὡς ἡ ΒΗ μονὰς πρὸς τὸν ΕΚ ἀριθμόν, οὕτως ἡ are equal to one another, and the numbers EK, KL, and
ΗΘ μονὰς πρὸς τὸν ΚΛ ἀριθμὸν καὶ ἡ ΘΓ μονὰς πρὸς τὸν LF are also equal to one another, and the multitude of
ΛΖ ἀριθμόν. ἔσται ἄρα καὶ ὡς εἷς τῶν ἡγουμένων πρὸς ἕνα the (units) BG, GH, HC is equal to the multitude of the
τῶν ἑπομένων, οὕτως ἅπαντες οἱ ἡγούμενοι πρὸς ἅπαντας numbers EK, KL, LF, thus as the unit BG (is) to the
τοὺς ἑπομένους· ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς ἡ ΒΗ μονὰς πρὸς τὸν ΕΚ number EK, so the unit GH will be to the number KL,
ἀριθμόν, οὕτως ὁ ΒΓ πρὸς τὸν ΕΖ. ἴση δὲ ἡ ΒΗ μονὰς τῇ and the unit HC to the number LF. And thus, as one of
Α μονάδι, ὁ δὲ ΕΚ ἀριθμὸς τῷ Δ ἀριθμῷ. ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς ἡ the leading (numbers is) to one of the following, so (the
Α μονὰς πρὸς τὸν Δ ἀριθμόν, οὕτως ὁ ΒΓ πρὸς τὸν ΕΖ. sum of) all of the leading will be to (the sum of) all of
ἰσάκις ἄρα ἡ Α μονὰς τὸν Δ ἀριθμὸν μετρεῖ καὶ ὁ ΒΓ τὸν the following [Prop. 7.12]. Thus, as the unit BG (is) to
ΕΖ· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. the number EK, so BC (is) to EF. And the unit BG (is)
equal to the unit A, and the number EK to the number
D. Thus, as the unit A is to the number D, so BC (is) to
EF. Thus, the unit A measures the number D as many
times as BC (measures) EF [Def. 7.20]. (Which is) the
very thing it was required to show.
† This proposition is a special case of Prop. 7.9.
207
STOIQEIWN zþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 7
iþ. Proposition 16†
Εὰν δύο ἀριθμοὶ πολλαπλασιάσαντες ἀλλήλους ποιῶσί If two numbers multiplying one another make some
τινας, οἱ γενόμενοι ἐξ αὐτῶν ἴσοι ἀλλήλοις ἔσονται. (numbers) then the (numbers) generated from them will
be equal to one another.
Ε
Β
Α
Γ
∆
E
A
B
C
D
῎Εστωσαν δύο ἀριθμοὶ οἱ Α, Β, καὶ ὁ μὲν Α τὸν Β πολ- Let A and B be two numbers. And let A make C (by)
λαπλασιάσας τὸν Γ ποιείτω, ὁ δὲ Β τὸν Α πολλαπλασιάσας multiplying B, and let B make D (by) multiplying A. I
τὸν Δ ποιείτω· λέγω, ὅτι ἴσος ἐστὶν ὁ Γ τῷ Δ. say that C is equal to D.
᾿Επεὶ γὰρ ὁ Α τὸν Β πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Γ πεποίηκεν, For since A has made C (by) multiplying B, B thus
ὁ Β ἄρα τὸν Γ μετρεῖ κατὰ τὰς ἐν τῷ Α μονάδας. μετρεῖ δὲ measures C according to the units in A [Def. 7.15]. And
καὶ ἡ Ε μονὰς τὸν Α ἀριθμὸν κατὰ τὰς ἐν αὐτῷ μονάδας· the unit E also measures the number A according to the
ἰσάκις ἄρα ἡ Ε μονὰς τὸν Α ἀριθμὸν μετρεῖ καὶ ὁ Β τὸν units in it. Thus, the unit E measures the number A as
Γ. ἐναλλὰξ ἄρα ἰσάκις ἡ Ε μονὰς τὸν Β ἀριθμὸν μετρεῖ καὶ many times as B (measures) C. Thus, alternately, the
ὁ Α τὸν Γ. πάλιν, ἐπεὶ ὁ Β τὸν Α πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Δ unit E measures the number B as many times as A (meaπεποίηκεν, ὁ Α ἄρα τὸν Δ μετρεῖ κατὰ τὰς ἐν τῷ Β μονάδας. sures) C [Prop. 7.15]. Again, since B has made D (by)
μετρεῖ δὲ καὶ ἡ Ε μονὰς τὸν Β κατὰ τὰς ἐν αὐτῷ μονάδας· multiplying A, A thus measures D according to the units
ἰσάκις ἄρα ἡ Ε μονὰς τὸν Β ἀριθμὸν μετρεῖ καὶ ὁ Α τὸν Δ. in B [Def. 7.15]. And the unit E also measures B acἰσάκις δὲ ἡ Ε μονὰς τὸν Β ἀριθμὸν ἐμέτρει καὶ ὁ Α τὸν Γ· cording to the units in it. Thus, the unit E measures the
ἰσάκις ἄρα ὁ Α ἑκάτερον τῶν Γ, Δ μετρεῖ. ἴσος ἄρα ἐστὶν number B as many times as A (measures) D. And the
ὁ Γ τῷ Δ· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. unit E was measuring the number B as many times as
A (measures) C. Thus, A measures each of C and D an
equal number of times. Thus, C is equal to D. (Which is)
the very thing it was required to show.
†
In modern notation, this proposition states that a b = b a, where all symbols denote numbers.
izþ. Proposition 17†
᾿Εὰν ἀριθμὸς δύο ἀριθμοὺς πολλαπλασιάσας ποιῇ τινας, If a number multiplying two numbers makes some
οἱ γενόμενοι ἐξ αὐτῶν τὸν αὐτὸν ἕξουσι λόγον τοῖς πολλα- (numbers) then the (numbers) generated from them will
πλασιασθεῖσιν. have the same ratio as the multiplied (numbers).
Ε
Α
Β
∆
Ζ
Γ
E
A
B
D
F
C
᾿Αριθμὸς γὰρ ὁ Α δύο ἀριθμοὺς τοὺς Β, Γ πολλα- For let the number A make (the numbers) D and
πλασιάσας τοὺς Δ, Ε ποιείτω· λέγω, ὅτι ἐστὶν ὡς ὁ Β πρὸς E (by) multiplying the two numbers B and C (respecτὸν Γ, οὕτως ὁ Δ πρὸς τὸν Ε. tively). I say that as B is to C, so D (is) to E.
᾿Επεὶ γὰρ ὁ Α τὸν Β πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Δ πεποίηκεν, For since A has made D (by) multiplying B, B thus
ὁ Β ἄρα τὸν Δ μετρεῖ κατὰ τὰς ἐν τῷ Α μονάδας. μετρεῖ measures D according to the units in A [Def. 7.15]. And
208
STOIQEIWN zþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 7
δὲ καὶ ἡ Ζ μονὰς τὸν Α ἀριθμὸν κατὰ τὰς ἐν αὐτῷ μονάδας· the unit F also measures the number A according to the
ἰσάκις ἄρα ἡ Ζ μονὰς τὸν Α ἀριθμὸν μετρεῖ καὶ ὁ Β τὸν Δ. units in it. Thus, the unit F measures the number A as
ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς ἡ Ζ μονὰς πρὸς τὸν Α ἀριθμόν, οὕτως ὁ Β many times as B (measures) D. Thus, as the unit F is
πρὸς τὸν Δ. διὰ τὰ αὐτὰ δὴ καὶ ὡς ἡ Ζ μονὰς πρὸς τὸν Α to the number A, so B (is) to D [Def. 7.20]. And so, for
ἀριθμόν, οὕτως ὁ Γ πρὸς τὸν Ε· καὶ ὡς ἄρα ὁ Β πρὸς τὸν the same (reasons), as the unit F (is) to the number A,
Δ, οὕτως ὁ Γ πρὸς τὸν Ε. ἐναλλὰξ ἄρα ἐστὶν ὡς ὁ Β πρὸς so C (is) to E. And thus, as B (is) to D, so C (is) to E.
τὸν Γ, οὕτως ὁ Δ πρὸς τὸν Ε· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. Thus, alternately, as B is to C, so D (is) to E [Prop. 7.13].
(Which is) the very thing it was required to show.
†
In modern notation, this proposition states that if d = a b and e = a c then d : e :: b : c, where all symbols denote numbers.
ihþ. Proposition 18†
᾿Εὰν δύο ἀριθμοὶ ἀριθμόν τινα πολλαπλασιάσαντες If two numbers multiplying some number make some
ποιῶσί τινας, οἱ γενόμενοι ἐξ αὐτῶν τὸν αὐτὸν ἕξουσι λόγον (other numbers) then the (numbers) generated from
τοῖς πολλαπλασιάσασιν. them will have the same ratio as the multiplying (numbers).
Ε
Β
Α
Γ
∆
E
B
A
C
D
Δύο γὰρ ἀριθμοὶ οἱ Α, Β ἀριθμόν τινα τὸν Γ πολλα- For let the two numbers A and B make (the numbers)
πλασιάσαντες τοὺς Δ, Ε ποιείτωσαν· λέγω, ὅτι ἐστὶν ὡς ὁ D and E (respectively, by) multiplying some number C.
Α πρὸς τὸν Β, οὕτως ὁ Δ πρὸς τὸν Ε. I say that as A is to B, so D (is) to E.
᾿Επεὶ γὰρ ὁ Α τὸν Γ πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Δ πεποίηκεν, For since A has made D (by) multiplying C, C has
καὶ ὁ Γ ἄρα τὸν Α πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Δ πεποίηκεν. διὰ thus also made D (by) multiplying A [Prop. 7.16]. So, for
τὰ αὐτὰ δὴ καὶ ὁ Γ τὸν Β πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Ε πεποίηκεν. the same (reasons), C has also made E (by) multiplying
ἀριθμὸς δὴ ὁ Γ δύο ἀριθμοὺς τοὺς Α, Β πολλαπλασιάσας B. So the number C has made D and E (by) multiplying
τοὺς Δ, Ε πεποίηκεν. ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν Β, οὕτως the two numbers A and B (respectively). Thus, as A is to
ὁ Δ πρὸς τὸν Ε· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. B, so D (is) to E [Prop. 7.17]. (Which is) the very thing
it was required to show.
†
In modern notation, this propositions states that if a c = d and b c = e then a : b :: d : e, where all symbols denote numbers.
ijþ. Proposition 19†
᾿Εὰν τέσσαρες ἀριθμοὶ ἀνάλογον ὦσιν, ὁ ἐκ πρώτου καὶ If four number are proportional then the number creτετάρτου γενόμενος ἀριθμὸς ἴσος ἔσται τῷ ἐκ δευτέρου καὶ ated from (multiplying) the first and fourth will be equal
τρίτου γενομένῳ ἀριθμῷ· καὶ ἐὰν ὁ ἐκ πρώτου καὶ τετάρτου to the number created from (multiplying) the second and
γενόμενος ἀριθμὸς ἴσος ᾖ τῷ ἐκ δευτέρου καὶ τρίτου, οἱ third. And if the number created from (multiplying) the
τέσσασρες ἀριθμοὶ ἀνάλογον ἔσονται. first and fourth is equal to the (number created) from
῎Εστωσαν τέσσαρες ἀριθμοὶ ἀνάλογον οἱ Α, Β, Γ, Δ, (multiplying) the second and third then the four numὡς ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν Β, οὕτως ὁ Γ πρὸς τὸν Δ, καὶ ὁ μὲν Α bers will be proportional.
τὸν Δ πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Ε ποιείτω, ὁ δὲ Β τὸν Γ πολ- Let A, B, C, and D be four proportional numbers,
λαπλασιάσας τὸν Ζ ποιείτω· λέγω, ὅτι ἴσος ἐστὶν ὁ Ε τῷ Ζ. (such that) as A (is) to B, so C (is) to D. And let A make
E (by) multiplying D, and let B make F (by) multiplying
C. I say that E is equal to F.
209
STOIQEIWN zþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 7
Α Β Γ ∆ Ε Ζ Η A B C D E F G
῾Ο γὰρ Α τὸν Γ πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Η ποιείτω. ἐπεὶ For let A make G (by) multiplying C. Therefore, since
οὖν ὁ Α τὸν Γ πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Η πεποίηκεν, τὸν δὲ A has made G (by) multiplying C, and has made E (by)
Δ πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Ε πεποίηκεν, ἀριθμὸς δὴ ὁ Α δύο multiplying D, the number A has made G and E by mulἀριθμοὺς τοὺς Γ, Δ πολλαπλασιάσας τούς Η, Ε πεποίηκεν. tiplying the two numbers C and D (respectively). Thus,
ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς ὁ Γ πρὸς τὸν Δ, οὕτως ὁ Η πρὸς τὸν Ε. ἀλλ᾿ as C is to D, so G (is) to E [Prop. 7.17]. But, as C (is) to
ὡς ὁ Γ πρὸς τὸν Δ, οὕτως ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν Β· καὶ ὡς ἄρα D, so A (is) to B. Thus, also, as A (is) to B, so G (is) to
ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν Β, οὕτως ὁ Η πρὸς τὸν Ε. πάλιν, ἐπεὶ ὁ Α E. Again, since A has made G (by) multiplying C, but,
τὸν Γ πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Η πεποίηκεν, ἀλλὰ μὴν καὶ ὁ in fact, B has also made F (by) multiplying C, the two
Β τὸν Γ πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Ζ πεποίηκεν, δύο δὴ ἀριθμοὶ numbers A and B have made G and F (respectively, by)
οἱ Α, Β ἀριθμόν τινα τὸν Γ πολλαπλασιάσαντες τοὺς Η, Ζ multiplying some number C. Thus, as A is to B, so G (is)
πεποιήκασιν. ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν Β, οὕτως ὁ Η πρὸς to F [Prop. 7.18]. But, also, as A (is) to B, so G (is) to
τὸν Ζ. ἀλλὰ μὴν καὶ ὡς ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν Β, οὕτως ὁ Η πρὸς E. And thus, as G (is) to E, so G (is) to F. Thus, G has
τὸν Ε· καὶ ὡς ἄρα ὁ Η πρὸς τὸν Ε, οὕτως ὁ Η πρὸς τὸν the same ratio to each of E and F. Thus, E is equal to F
Ζ. ὁ Η ἄρα πρὸς ἑκάτερον τῶν Ε, Ζ τὸν αὐτὸν ἔχει λόγον· [Prop. 5.9].
ἴσος ἄρα ἐστὶν ὁ Ε τῷ Ζ. So, again, let E be equal to F. I say that as A is to B,
῎Εστω δὴ πάλιν ἴσος ὁ Ε τῷ Ζ· λέγω, ὅτι ἐστὶν ὡς ὁ Α so C (is) to D.
πρὸς τὸν Β, οὕτως ὁ Γ πρὸς τὸν Δ. For, with the same construction, since E is equal to F,
Τῶν γὰρ αὐτῶν κατασκευασθέντων, ἐπεὶ ἴσος ἐστὶν ὁ thus as G is to E, so G (is) to F [Prop. 5.7]. But, as G
Ε τῷ Ζ, ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς ὁ Η πρὸς τὸν Ε, οὕτως ὁ Η πρὸς τὸν (is) to E, so C (is) to D [Prop. 7.17]. And as G (is) to F,
Ζ. ἀλλ᾿ ὡς μὲν ὁ Η πρὸς τὸν Ε, οὕτως ὁ Γ πρὸς τὸν Δ, ὡς so A (is) to B [Prop. 7.18]. And, thus, as A (is) to B, so
δὲ ὁ Η πρὸς τὸν Ζ, οὕτως ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν Β. καὶ ὡς ἄρα ὁ Α C (is) to D. (Which is) the very thing it was required to
πρὸς τὸν Β, οὕτως ὁ Γ πρὸς τὸν Δ· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. show.
†
In modern notation, this proposition reads that if a : b :: c : d then a d = b c, and vice versa, where all symbols denote numbers.
kþ. Proposition 20
Οἱ ἐλάχιστοι ἀριθμοὶ τῶν τὸν αὐτὸν λόγον ἐχόντων The least numbers of those (numbers) having the
αὐτοῖς μετροῦσι τοὺς τὸν αὐτὸν λόγον ἔχοντας ἰσάκις ὅ same ratio measure those (numbers) having the same raτε μείζων τὸν μείζονα καὶ ὁ ἐλάσσων τὸν ἐλάσσονα. tio as them an equal number of times, the greater (mea-
῎Εστωσαν γὰρ ἐλάχιστοι ἀριθμοὶ τῶν τὸν αὐτὸν λόγον suring) the greater, and the lesser the lesser.
ἐχόντων τοῖς Α, Β οἱ ΓΔ, ΕΖ· λέγω, ὅτι ἰσάκις ὁ ΓΔ τὸν For let CD and EF be the least numbers having the
Α μετρεῖ καὶ ὁ ΕΖ τὸν Β. same ratio as A and B (respectively). I say that CD measures A the same number of times as EF (measures) B.
210
STOIQEIWN zþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 7
Ε
Α Β
Γ
Η
∆
Ζ
Θ
F
A B C
G
D
E
H
῾Ο ΓΔ γὰρ τοῦ Α οὔκ ἐστι μέρη. εἰ γὰρ δυνατόν, ἔστω· For CD is not parts of A. For, if possible, let it be
καὶ ὁ ΕΖ ἄρα τοῦ Β τὰ αὐτὰ μέρη ἐστίν, ἅπερ ὁ ΓΔ τοῦ (parts of A). Thus, EF is also the same parts of B that
Α. ὅσα ἄρα ἐστὶν ἐν τῷ ΓΔ μέρη τοῦ Α, τοσαῦτά ἐστι καὶ CD (is) of A [Def. 7.20, Prop. 7.13]. Thus, as many parts
ἐν τῷ ΕΖ μέρη τοῦ Β. διῃρήσθω ὁ μὲν ΓΔ εἰς τὰ τοῦ Α of A as are in CD, so many parts of B are also in EF. Let
μέρη τὰ ΓΗ, ΗΔ, ὁ δὲ ΕΖ εἰς τὰ τοῦ Β μέρη τὰ ΕΘ, ΘΖ· CD have been divided into the parts of A, CG and GD,
ἔσται δὴ ἴσον τὸ πλῆθος τῶν ΓΗ, ΗΔ τῷ πλήθει τῶν ΕΘ, and EF into the parts of B, EH and HF. So the multiΘΖ. καὶ ἐπεὶ ἴσοι εἰσὶν οἱ ΓΗ, ΗΔ ἀριθμοὶ ἀλλήλοις, εἰσὶ tude of (divisions) CG, GD will be equal to the multitude
δὲ καὶ οἱ ΕΘ, ΘΖ ἀριθμοὶ ἴσοι ἀλλήλοις, καί ἐστιν ἴσον τὸ of (divisions) EH, HF. And since the numbers CG and
πλῆθος τῶν ΓΗ, ΗΔ τῷ πλήθει τῶν ΕΘ, ΘΖ, ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς GD are equal to one another, and the numbers EH and
ὁ ΓΗ πρὸς τὸν ΕΘ, οὕτως ὁ ΗΔ πρὸς τὸν ΘΖ. ἔσται ἄρα HF are also equal to one another, and the multitude of
καὶ ὡς εἷς τῶν ἡγουμένων πρὸς ἕνα τῶν ἑπομένων, οὕτως (divisions) CG, GD is equal to the multitude of (diviἅπαντες οἱ ἡγούμενοι πρὸς ἅπαντας τοὺς ἑπομένους. ἔστιν sions) EH, HF, thus as CG is to EH, so GD (is) to HF.
ἄρα ὡς ὁ ΓΗ πρὸς τὸν ΕΘ, οὕτως ὁ ΓΔ πρὸς τὸν ΕΖ· οἱ Thus, as one of the leading (numbers is) to one of the
ΓΗ, ΕΘ ἄρα τοῖς ΓΔ, ΕΖ ἐν τῷ αὐτῷ λόγῳ εἰσὶν ἐλάσσονες following, so will (the sum of) all of the leading (numὄντες αὐτῶν· ὅπερ ἐστὶν ἀδύνατον· ὑπόκεινται γὰρ οἱ ΓΔ, bers) be to (the sum of) all of the following [Prop. 7.12].
ΕΖ ἐλάχιστοι τῶν τὸν αὐτὸν λόγον ἐχόντων αὐτοῖς. οὐκ Thus, as CG is to EH, so CD (is) to EF. Thus, CG
ἄρα μέρη ἐστὶν ὁ ΓΔ τοῦ Α· μέρος ἄρα. καὶ ὁ ΕΖ τοῦ Β τὸ and EH are in the same ratio as CD and EF, being less
αὐτὸ μέρος ἐστίν, ὅπερ ὁ ΓΔ τοῦ Α· ἰσάκις ἄρα ὁ ΓΔ τὸν than them. The very thing is impossible. For CD and
Α μετρεῖ καὶ ὁ ΕΖ τὸν Β· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. EF were assumed (to be) the least of those (numbers)
having the same ratio as them. Thus, CD is not parts of
A. Thus, (it is) a part (of A) [Prop. 7.4]. And EF is the
same part of B that CD (is) of A [Def. 7.20, Prop 7.13].
Thus, CD measures A the same number of times that EF
(measures) B. (Which is) the very thing it was required
to show.
kaþ. Proposition 21
Οἱ πρῶτοι πρὸς ἀλλήλους ἀριθμοὶ ἐλάχιστοί εἰσι τῶν τὸν Numbers prime to one another are the least of those
αὐτὸν λόγον ἐχόντων αὐτοῖς. (numbers) having the same ratio as them.
῎Εστωσαν πρῶτοι πρὸς ἀλλήλους ἀριθμοὶ οἱ Α, Β· λέγω, Let A and B be numbers prime to one another. I say
ὅτι οἱ Α, Β ἐλάχιστοί εἰσι τῶν τὸν αὐτὸν λόγον ἐχόντων that A and B are the least of those (numbers) having the
αὐτοῖς. same ratio as them.
Εἰ γὰρ μή, ἔσονταί τινες τῶν Α, Β ἐλάσσονες ἀριθμοὶ For if not then there will be some numbers less than A
ἐν τῷ αὐτῷ λόγῳ ὄντες τοῖς Α, Β. ἔστωσαν οἱ Γ, Δ. and B which are in the same ratio as A and B. Let them
be C and D.
211
STOIQEIWN zþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 7
Α Β Γ ∆ Ε A B C D E
᾿Επεὶ οὖν οἱ ἐλάχιστοι ἀριθμοὶ τῶν τὸν αὐτὸν λόγον Therefore, since the least numbers of those (numἐχόντων μετροῦσι τοὺς τὸν αὐτὸν λόγον ἔχοντας ἰσάκις bers) having the same ratio measure those (numbers)
ὅ τε μείζων τὸν μείζονα καὶ ὁ ἐλάττων τὸν ἐλάττονα, having the same ratio (as them) an equal number of
τουτέστιν ὅ τε ἡγούμενος τὸν ἡγούμενον καὶ ὁ ἑπόμενος times, the greater (measuring) the greater, and the lesser
τὸν ἑπόμενον, ἰσάκις ἄρα ὁ Γ τὸν Α μετρεῖ καὶ ὁ Δ τὸν Β. the lesser—that is to say, the leading (measuring) the
ὁσάκις δὴ ὁ Γ τὸν Α μετρεῖ, τοσαῦται μονάδες ἔστωσαν ἐν leading, and the following the following—C thus meaτῷ Ε. καὶ ὁ Δ ἄρα τὸν Β μετρεῖ κατὰ τὰς ἐν τῷ Ε μονάδας. sures A the same number of times that D (measures) B
καὶ ἐπεὶ ὁ Γ τὸν Α μετρεῖ κατὰ τὰς ἐν τῷ Ε μονάδας, καί ὁ [Prop. 7.20]. So as many times as C measures A, so many
Ε ἄρα τὸν Α μετρεῖ κατὰ τὰς ἐν τῷ Γ μονάδας. διὰ τὰ αὐτὰ units let there be in E. Thus, D also measures B accordδὴ ὁ Ε καὶ τὸν Β μετρεῖ κατὰ τὰς ἐν τῷ Δ μονάδας. ὁ Ε ing to the units in E. And since C measures A according
ἄρα τοὺς Α, Β μετρεῖ πρώτους ὄντας πρὸς ἀλλήλους· ὅπερ to the units in E, E thus also measures A according to
ἐστὶν ἀδύνατον. οὐκ ἄρα ἔσονταί τινες τῶν Α, Β ἐλάσσονες the units in C [Prop. 7.16]. So, for the same (reasons), E
ἀριθμοὶ ἐν τῷ αὐτῷ λόγῳ ὄντες τοῖς Α, Β. οἱ Α, Β ἄρα also measures B according to the units in D [Prop. 7.16].
ἐλάχιστοί εἰσι τῶν τὸν αὐτὸν λόγον ἐχόντων αὐτοῖς· ὅπερ Thus, E measures A and B, which are prime to one anἔδει δεῖξαι. other. The very thing is impossible. Thus, there cannot
be any numbers less than A and B which are in the same
ratio as A and B. Thus, A and B are the least of those
(numbers) having the same ratio as them. (Which is) the
very thing it was required to show.
kbþ. Proposition 22
Οἱ ἐλάχιστοι ἀριθμοὶ τῶν τὸν αὐτὸν λόγον ἐχόντων The least numbers of those (numbers) having the
αὐτοῖς πρῶτοι πρὸς ἀλλήλους εἰσίν. same ratio as them are prime to one another.
Ε
Α
Β
Γ
∆
E
A
B
C
D
῎Εστωσαν ἐλάχιστοι ἀριθμοὶ τῶν τὸν αὐτὸν λόγον Let A and B be the least numbers of those (numbers)
ἐχόντων αὐτοῖς οἱ Α, Β· λέγω, ὅτι οἱ Α, Β πρῶτοι πρὸς having the same ratio as them. I say that A and B are
ἀλλήλους εἰσίν. prime to one another.
Εἰ γὰρ μή εἰσι πρῶτοι πρὸς ἀλλήλους, μετρήσει τις For if they are not prime to one another then some
αὐτοὺς ἀριθμός. μετρείτω, καὶ ἔστω ὁ Γ. καὶ ὁσάκις μὲν number will measure them. Let it (so measure them),
ὁ Γ τὸν Α μετρεῖ, τοσαῦται μονάδες ἔστωσαν ἐν τῷ Δ, and let it be C. And as many times as C measures A, so
212
STOIQEIWN zþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 7
ὁσάκις δὲ ὁ Γ τὸν Β μετρεῖ, τοσαῦται μονάδες ἔστωσαν ἐν many units let there be in D. And as many times as C
τῷ Ε. measures B, so many units let there be in E.
᾿Επεὶ ὁ Γ τὸν Α μετρεῖ κατὰ τὰς ἐν τῷ Δ μονάδας, ὁ Since C measures A according to the units in D, C
Γ ἄρα τὸν Δ πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Α πεποίηκεν. διὰ τὰ has thus made A (by) multiplying D [Def. 7.15]. So, for
αὐτὰ δὴ καὶ ὁ Γ τὸν Ε πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Β πεποίηκεν. the same (reasons), C has also made B (by) multiplying
ἀριθμὸς δὴ ὁ Γ δύο ἀριθμοὺς τοὺς Δ, Ε πολλαπλασιάσας E. So the number C has made A and B (by) multiplying
τοὺς Α, Β πεποίηκεν· ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς ὁ Δ πρὸς τὸν Ε, οὕτως the two numbers D and E (respectively). Thus, as D is
ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν Β· οἱ Δ, Ε ἄρα τοῖς Α, Β ἐν τῷ αὐτῷ λόγῳ to E, so A (is) to B [Prop. 7.17]. Thus, D and E are in
εἰσὶν ἐλάσσονες ὄντες αὐτῶν· ὅπερ ἐστὶν ἀδύνατον. οὐκ the same ratio as A and B, being less than them. The
ἄρα τοὺς Α, Β ἀριθμοὺς ἀριθμός τις μετρήσει. οἱ Α, Β ἄρα very thing is impossible. Thus, some number does not
πρῶτοι πρὸς ἀλλήλους εἰσίν· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. measure the numbers A and B. Thus, A and B are prime
to one another. (Which is) the very thing it was required
to show.
kgþ. Proposition 23
᾿Εὰν δύο ἀριθμοὶ πρῶτοι πρὸς ἀλλήλους ὦσιν, ὁ τὸν ἕνα If two numbers are prime to one another then a numαὐτῶν μετρῶν ἀριθμὸς πρὸς τὸν λοιπὸν πρῶτος ἔσται. ber measuring one of them will be prime to the remaining
(one).
Α Γ ∆ Β . A B C D
῎Εστωσαν δύο ἀριθμοὶ πρῶτοι πρὸς ἀλλήλους οἱ Α, Β, Let A and B be two numbers (which are) prime to
τὸν δὲ Α μετρείτω τις ἀριθμὸς ὁ Γ· λέγω, ὅτι καὶ οἱ Γ, Β one another, and let some number C measure A. I say
πρῶτοι πρὸς ἀλλήλους εἰσίν. that C and B are also prime to one another.
Εἰ γὰρ μή εἰσιν οἱ Γ, Β πρῶτοι πρὸς ἀλλήλους, μετρήσει For if C and B are not prime to one another then
[τις] τοὺς Γ, Β ἀριθμός. μετρείτω, καὶ ἔστω ὁ Δ. ἐπεὶ ὁ [some] number will measure C and B. Let it (so) meaΔ τὸν Γ μετρεῖ, ὁ δὲ Γ τὸν Α μετρεῖ, καὶ ὁ Δ ἄρα τὸν Α sure (them), and let it be D. Since D measures C, and C
μετρεῖ. μετρεῖ δὲ καὶ τὸν Β· ὁ Δ ἄρα τοὺς Α, Β μετρεῖ measures A, D thus also measures A. And (D) also meaπρώτους ὄντας πρὸς ἀλλήλους· ὅπερ ἐστὶν ἀδύνατον. οὐκ sures B. Thus, D measures A and B, which are prime
ἄρα τοὺς Γ, Β ἀριθμοὺς ἀριθμός τις μετρήσει. οἱ Γ, Β ἄρα to one another. The very thing is impossible. Thus, some
πρῶτοι πρὸς ἀλλήλους εἰσίν· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. number does not measure the numbers C and B. Thus,
C and B are prime to one another. (Which is) the very
thing it was required to show.
kdþ. Proposition 24
᾿Εὰν δύο ἀριθμοὶ πρός τινα ἀριθμὸν πρῶτοι ὦσιν, καὶ ὁ If two numbers are prime to some number then the
ἐξ αὐτῶν γενόμενος πρὸς τὸν αὐτὸν πρῶτος ἔσται. number created from (multiplying) the former (two numbers) will also be prime to the latter (number).
213
STOIQEIWN zþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 7
Α Β Γ ∆ Ε Ζ A B C D E F
Δύο γὰρ ἀριθμοὶ οἱ Α, Β πρός τινα ἀριθμὸν τὸν Γ πρῶτοι For let A and B be two numbers (which are both)
ἔστωσαν, καὶ ὁ Α τὸν Β πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Δ ποιείτω· prime to some number C. And let A make D (by) multiλέγω, ὅτι οἱ Γ, Δ πρῶτοι πρὸς ἀλλήλους εἰσίν. plying B. I say that C and D are prime to one another.
Εἰ γὰρ μή εἰσιν οἱ Γ, Δ πρῶτοι πρὸς ἀλλήλους, μετρήσει For if C and D are not prime to one another then
[τις] τοὺς Γ, Δ ἀριθμός. μετρείτω, καὶ ἔστω ὁ Ε. καὶ ἐπεὶ [some] number will measure C and D. Let it (so) meaοἱ Γ, Δ πρῶτοι πρὸς ἀλλήλους εἰσίν, τὸν δὲ Γ μετρεῖ τις sure them, and let it be E. And since C and A are prime
ἀριθμὸς ὁ Ε, οἱ Α, Ε ἄρα πρῶτοι πρὸς ἀλλήλους εἰσίν. to one another, and some number E measures C, A and
ὁσάκις δὴ ὁ Ε τὸν Δ μετρεῖ, τοσαῦται μονάδες ἔστωσαν ἐν E are thus prime to one another [Prop. 7.23]. So as
τῷ Ζ· καὶ ὁ Ζ ἄρα τὸν Δ μετρεῖ κατὰ τὰς ἐν τῷ Ε μονάδας. many times as E measures D, so many units let there
ὁ Ε ἄρα τὸν Ζ πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Δ πεποίηκεν. ἀλλὰ be in F. Thus, F also measures D according to the units
μὴν καὶ ὁ Α τὸν Β πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Δ πεποίηκεν· ἴσος in E [Prop. 7.16]. Thus, E has made D (by) multiplyἄρα ἐστὶν ὁ ἑκ τῶν Ε, Ζ τῷ ἐκ τῶν Α, Β. ἐὰν δὲ ὁ ὑπὸ ing F [Def. 7.15]. But, in fact, A has also made D (by)
τῶν ἄκρων ἴσος ᾖ τῷ ὑπὸ τῶν μέσων, οἱ τέσσαρες ἀριθμοὶ multiplying B. Thus, the (number created) from (multiἀνάλογόν εἰσιν· ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς ὁ Ε πρὸς τὸν Α, οὕτως ὁ Β plying) E and F is equal to the (number created) from
πρὸς τὸν Ζ. οἱ δὲ Α, Ε πρῶτοι, οἱ δὲ πρῶτοι καὶ ἐλάχιστοι, οἱ (multiplying) A and B. And if the (rectangle contained)
δὲ ἐλάχιστοι ἀριθμοὶ τῶν τὸν αὐτὸν λόγον ἐχόντων αὐτοῖς by the (two) outermost is equal to the (rectangle conμετροῦσι τοὺς τὸν αὐτὸν λόγον ἔχοντας ἰσάκις ὅ τε μείζων tained) by the middle (two) then the four numbers are
τὸν μείζονα καὶ ὁ ἐλάσσων τὸν ἐλάσσονα, τουτέστιν ὅ τε proportional [Prop. 6.15]. Thus, as E is to A, so B (is)
ἡγούμενος τὸν ἡγούμενον καὶ ὁ ἑπόμενος τὸν ἑπόμενον· ὁ to F. And A and E (are) prime (to one another). And
Ε ἄρα τὸν Β μετρεῖ. μετρεῖ δὲ καὶ τὸν Γ· ὁ Ε ἄρα τοὺς Β, Γ (numbers) prime (to one another) are also the least (of
μετρεῖ πρώτους ὄντας πρὸς ἀλλήλους· ὅπερ ἐστὶν ἀδύνατον. those numbers having the same ratio) [Prop. 7.21]. And
οὐκ ἄρα τοὺς Γ, Δ ἀριθμοὺς ἀριθμός τις μετρήσει. οἱ Γ, Δ the least numbers of those (numbers) having the same
ἄρα πρῶτοι πρὸς ἀλλήλους εἰσίν· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. ratio measure those (numbers) having the same ratio as
them an equal number of times, the greater (measuring)
the greater, and the lesser the lesser—that is to say, the
leading (measuring) the leading, and the following the
following [Prop. 7.20]. Thus, E measures B. And it also
measures C. Thus, E measures B and C, which are prime
to one another. The very thing is impossible. Thus, some
number cannot measure the numbers C and D. Thus,
C and D are prime to one another. (Which is) the very
thing it was required to show.
keþ. Proposition 25
᾿Εὰν δύο ἀριθμοὶ πρῶτοι πρὸς ἀλλήλους ὦσιν, ὁ ἐκ τοῦ If two numbers are prime to one another then the
ἑνὸς αὐτῶν γενόμενος πρὸς τὸν λοιπὸν πρῶτος ἔσται. number created from (squaring) one of them will be
῎Εστωσαν δύο ἀριθμοὶ πρῶτοι πρὸς ἀλλήλους οἱ Α, Β, prime to the remaining (number).
καὶ ὁ Α ἑαυτὸν πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Γ ποιείτω· λέγω, ὅτι Let A and B be two numbers (which are) prime to
214
STOIQEIWN zþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 7
οἱ Β, Γ πρῶτοι πρὸς ἀλλὴλους εἰσίν. one another. And let A make C (by) multiplying itself. I
say that B and C are prime to one another.
Α Β Γ ∆ A B C D
Κείσθω γὰρ τῷ Α ἴσος ὁ Δ. ἐπεὶ οἱ Α, Β πρῶτοι πρὸς For let D be made equal to A. Since A and B are
ἀλλήλους εἰσίν, ἴσος δὲ ὁ Α τῷ Δ, καί οἱ Δ, Β ἄρα πρῶτοι prime to one another, and A (is) equal to D, D and B are
πρὸς ἀλλήλους εἰσίν· ἑκάτερος ἄρα τῶν Δ, Α πρὸς τὸν Β thus also prime to one another. Thus, D and A are each
πρῶτός ἐστιν· καὶ ὁ ἐκ τῶν Δ, Α ἄρα γενόμενος πρὸς τὸν Β prime to B. Thus, the (number) created from (multilyπρῶτος ἔσται. ὁ δὲ ἐκ τῶν Δ, Α γενόμενος ἀριθμός ἐστιν ὁ ing) D and A will also be prime to B [Prop. 7.24]. And C
Γ. οἱ Γ, Β ἄρα πρῶτοι πρὸς ἀλλήλους εἰσίν· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. is the number created from (multiplying) D and A. Thus,
C and B are prime to one another. (Which is) the very
thing it was required to show.
kþ. Proposition 26
᾿Εὰν δύο ἀριθμοὶ πρὸς δύο ἀριθμοὺς ἀμφότεροι πρὸς If two numbers are both prime to each of two numbers
ἑκάτερον πρῶτοι ὦσιν, καὶ οἱ ἐξ αὐτῶν γενόμενοι πρῶτοι then the (numbers) created from (multiplying) them will
πρὸς ἀλλήλους ἔσονται. also be prime to one another.
Ζ
Γ
Β
Α
∆
Ε
F
A C
B D
E
Δύο γὰρ ἀριθμοὶ οἱ Α, Β πρὸς δύο ἀριθμοὺς τοὺς Γ, For let two numbers, A and B, both be prime to each
Δ ἀμφότεροι πρὸς ἑκάτερον πρῶτοι ἔστωσαν, καὶ ὁ μὲν of two numbers, C and D. And let A make E (by) mulΑ τὸν Β πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Ε ποιείτω, ὁ δὲ Γ τὸν Δ tiplying B, and let C make F (by) multiplying D. I say
πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Ζ ποιείτω· λέγω, ὅτι οἱ Ε, Ζ πρῶτοι that E and F are prime to one another.
πρὸς ἀλλήλους εἰσίν. For since A and B are each prime to C, the (num-
᾿Επεὶ γὰρ ἑκάτερος τῶν Α, Β πρὸς τὸν Γ πρῶτός ἐστιν, ber) created from (multiplying) A and B will thus also
καὶ ὁ ἐκ τῶν Α, Β ἄρα γενόμενος πρὸς τὸν Γ πρῶτος ἔσται. be prime to C [Prop. 7.24]. And E is the (number) creὁ δὲ ἐκ τῶν Α, Β γενόμενός ἐστιν ὁ Ε· οἱ Ε, Γ ἄρα πρῶτοι ated from (multiplying) A and B. Thus, E and C are
πρὸς ἀλλήλους εἰσίν. διὰ τὰ αὐτὰ δὴ καὶ οἱ Ε, Δ πρῶτοι prime to one another. So, for the same (reasons), E and
πρὸς ἀλλήλους εἰσίν. ἑκάτερος ἄρα τῶν Γ, Δ πρὸς τὸν Ε D are also prime to one another. Thus, C and D are each
πρῶτός ἐστιν. καὶ ὁ ἐκ τῶν Γ, Δ ἄρα γενόμενος πρὸς τὸν prime to E. Thus, the (number) created from (multiplyΕ πρῶτος ἔσται. ὁ δὲ ἐκ τῶν Γ, Δ γενόμενός ἐστιν ὁ Ζ. οἱ ing) C and D will also be prime to E [Prop. 7.24]. And
Ε, Ζ ἄρα πρῶτοι πρὸς ἀλλήλους εἰσίν· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. F is the (number) created from (multiplying) C and D.
Thus, E and F are prime to one another. (Which is) the
very thing it was required to show.
215
STOIQEIWN zþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 7
kzþ. Proposition 27†
᾿Εὰν δύο ἀριθμοὶ πρῶτοι πρὸς ἀλλήλους ὦσιν, καὶ πολ- If two numbers are prime to one another and each
λαπλασιάσας ἑκάτερος ἑαυτὸν ποιῇ τινα, οἱ γενόμενοι ἐξ makes some (number by) multiplying itself then the numαὐτῶν πρῶτοι πρὸς ἀλλήλους ἔσονται, κἂν οἱ ἐξ ἀρχῆς bers created from them will be prime to one another, and
τοὺς γενομένους πολλαπλασιάσαντες ποιῶσί τινας, κἀκεῖνοι if the original (numbers) make some (more numbers by)
πρῶτοι πρὸς ἀλλήλους ἔσονται [καὶ ἀεὶ περὶ τοὺς ἄκρους multiplying the created (numbers) then these will also be
τοῦτο συμβαίνει]. prime to one another [and this always happens with the
extremes].
Α Β Γ ∆ Ε Ζ A B C D E F
῎Εστωσαν δύο ἀριθμοὶ πρῶτοι πρὸς ἀλλήλους οἱ Α, Β, Let A and B be two numbers prime to one another,
καὶ ὁ Α ἑαυτὸν μὲν πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Γ ποιείτω, τὸν and let A make C (by) multiplying itself, and let it make
δὲ Γ πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Δ ποιείτω, ὁ δὲ Β ἑαυτὸν μὲν D (by) multiplying C. And let B make E (by) multiplying
πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Ε ποιείτω, τὸν δὲ Ε πολλαπλασιάσας itself, and let it make F by multiplying E. I say that C
τὸν Ζ ποιείτω· λέγω, ὅτι οἵ τε Γ, Ε καὶ οἱ Δ, Ζ πρῶτοι πρὸς and E, and D and F, are prime to one another.
ἀλλήλους εἰσίν. For since A and B are prime to one another, and A has
᾿Επεὶ γὰρ οἱ Α, Β πρῶτοι πρὸς ἀλλήλους εἰσίν, καὶ ὁ made C (by) multiplying itself, C and B are thus prime
Α ἑαυτὸν πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Γ πεποίηκεν, οἱ Γ, Β ἄρα to one another [Prop. 7.25]. Therefore, since C and B
πρῶτοι πρὸς ἀλλήλους εἰσίν. ἐπεὶ οὖν οἱ Γ, Β πρῶτοι πρὸς are prime to one another, and B has made E (by) mulἀλλήλους εἰσίν, καὶ ὁ Β ἑαυτὸν πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Ε tiplying itself, C and E are thus prime to one another
πεποίηκεν, οἱ Γ, Ε ἄρα πρῶτοι πρὸς ἀλλήλους εἰσίν. πάλιν, [Prop. 7.25]. Again, since A and B are prime to one anἐπεὶ οἱ Α, Β πρῶτοι πρὸς ἀλλήλους εἰσίν, καὶ ὁ Β ἑαυτὸν other, and B has made E (by) multiplying itself, A and
πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Ε πεποίηκεν, οἱ Α, Ε ἄρα πρῶτοι πρὸς E are thus prime to one another [Prop. 7.25]. Therefore,
ἀλλήλους εἰσίν. ἐπεὶ οὖν δύο ἀριθμοὶ οἱ Α, Γ πρὸς δύο since the two numbers A and C are both prime to each
ἀριθμοὺς τοὺς Β, Ε ἀμφότεροι πρὸς ἑκάτερον πρῶτοί εἰσιν, of the two numbers B and E, the (number) created from
καὶ ὁ ἐκ τῶν Α, Γ ἄρα γενόμενος πρὸς τὸν ἐκ τῶν Β, Ε (multiplying) A and C is thus prime to the (number creπρῶτός ἐστιν. καί ἐστιν ὁ μὲν ἐκ τῶν Α, Γ ὁ Δ, ὁ δὲ ἐκ ated) from (multiplying) B and E [Prop. 7.26]. And D is
τῶν Β, Ε ὁ Ζ. οἱ Δ, Ζ ἄρα πρῶτοι πρὸς ἀλλήλους εἰσίν· the (number created) from (multiplying) A and C, and F
ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. the (number created) from (multiplying) B and E. Thus,
D and F are prime to one another. (Which is) the very
thing it was required to show.
†
In modern notation, this proposition states that if a is prime to b, then a
2
is also prime to b
2
, as well as a
3
to b
3
, etc., where all symbols denote
numbers.
khþ. Proposition 28
᾿Εὰν δύο ἀριθμοὶ πρῶτοι πρὸς ἀλλήλους ὦσιν, καὶ συ- If two numbers are prime to one another then their
ναμφότερος πρὸς ἑκάτερον αὐτῶν πρῶτος ἔσται· καὶ ἐὰν sum will also be prime to each of them. And if the sum
συναμφότερος πρὸς ἕνα τινὰ αὐτῶν πρῶτος ᾖ, καὶ οἱ ἐξ (of two numbers) is prime to any one of them then the
ἀρχῆς ἀριθμοὶ πρῶτοι πρὸς ἀλλήλους ἔσονται. original numbers will also be prime to one another.
216
STOIQEIWN zþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 7
Γ
∆
Α Β C
D
A B
Συγκείσθωσαν γὰρ δύο ἀριθμοὶ πρῶτοι πρὸς ἀλλήλ- For let the two numbers, AB and BC, (which are)
ους οἱ ΑΒ, ΒΓ· λέγω, ὅτι καὶ συναμφότερος ὁ ΑΓ πρὸς prime to one another, be laid down together. I say that
ἑκάτερον τῶν ΑΒ, ΒΓ πρῶτός ἐστιν. their sum AC is also prime to each of AB and BC.
Εἰ γὰρ μή εἰσιν οἱ ΓΑ, ΑΒ πρῶτοι πρὸς ἀλλήλους, For if CA and AB are not prime to one another then
μετρήσει τις τοὺς ΓΑ, ΑΒ ἀριθμός. μετρείτω, καὶ ἔστω ὁ Δ. some number will measure CA and AB. Let it (so) meaἐπεὶ οὖν ὁ Δ τοὺς ΓΑ, ΑΒ μετρεῖ, καὶ λοιπὸν ἄρα τὸν ΒΓ sure (them), and let it be D. Therefore, since D measures
μετρήσει. μετρεῖ δὲ καὶ τὸν ΒΑ· ὁ Δ ἄρα τοὺς ΑΒ, ΒΓ με- CA and AB, it will thus also measure the remainder BC.
τρεῖ πρώτους ὄντας πρὸς ἀλλήλους· ὅπερ ἐστὶν ἀδύνατον. And it also measures BA. Thus, D measures AB and
οὐκ ἄρα τοὺς ΓΑ, ΑΒ ἀριθμοὺς ἀριθμός τις μετρήσει· οἱ BC, which are prime to one another. The very thing is
ΓΑ, ΑΒ ἄρα πρῶτοι πρὸς ἀλλήλους εἰσίν. διὰ τὰ αὐτὰ δὴ impossible. Thus, some number cannot measure (both)
καὶ οἱ ΑΓ, ΓΒ πρῶτοι πρὸς ἀλλήλους εἰσίν. ὁ ΓΑ ἄρα πρὸς the numbers CA and AB. Thus, CA and AB are prime
ἑκάτερον τῶν ΑΒ, ΒΓ πρῶτός ἐστιν. to one another. So, for the same (reasons), AC and CB
῎Εστωσαν δὴ πάλιν οἱ ΓΑ, ΑΒ πρῶτοι πρὸς ἀλλήλους· are also prime to one another. Thus, CA is prime to each
λέγω, ὅτι καὶ οἱ ΑΒ, ΒΓ πρῶτοι πρὸς ἀλλήλους εἰσίν. of AB and BC.
Εἰ γὰρ μή εἰσιν οἱ ΑΒ, ΒΓ πρῶτοι πρὸς ἀλλήλους, So, again, let CA and AB be prime to one another. I
μετρήσει τις τοὺς ΑΒ, ΒΓ ἀριθμός. μετρείτω, καὶ ἔστω ὁ Δ. say that AB and BC are also prime to one another.
καὶ ἐπεὶ ὁ Δ ἑκάτερον τῶν ΑΒ, ΒΓ μετρεῖ, καὶ ὅλον ἄρα τὸν For if AB and BC are not prime to one another then
ΓΑ μετρήσει. μετρεῖ δὲ καὶ τὸν ΑΒ· ὁ Δ ἄρα τοὺς ΓΑ, ΑΒ some number will measure AB and BC. Let it (so) meaμετρεῖ πρώτους ὄντας πρὸς ἀλλήλους· ὅπερ ἐστὶν ἀδύνατον. sure (them), and let it be D. And since D measures each
οὐκ ἄρα τοὺς ΑΒ, ΒΓ ἀριθμοὺς ἀριθμός τις μετρήσει. οἱ of AB and BC, it will thus also measure the whole of
ΑΒ, ΒΓ ἄρα πρῶτοι πρὸς ἀλλήλους εἰσίν· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. CA. And it also measures AB. Thus, D measures CA
and AB, which are prime to one another. The very thing
is impossible. Thus, some number cannot measure (both)
the numbers AB and BC. Thus, AB and BC are prime
to one another. (Which is) the very thing it was required
to show.
kjþ. Proposition 29
῞Απας πρῶτος ἀριθμὸς πρὸς ἅπαντα ἀριθμόν, ὃν μὴ με- Every prime number is prime to every number which
τρεῖ, πρῶτός ἐστιν. it does not measure.
Γ
Α
Β
C
A
B
῎Εστω πρῶτος ἀριθμὸς ὁ Α καὶ τὸν Β μὴ μετρείτω· λέγω, Let A be a prime number, and let it not measure B. I
ὅτι οἱ Β, Α πρῶτοι πρὸς ἀλλήλους εἰσίν. say that B and A are prime to one another. For if B and
Εἰ γὰρ μή εἰσιν οἱ Β, Α πρῶτοι πρὸς ἀλλήλους, μετρήσει A are not prime to one another then some number will
τις αὐτοὺς ἀριθμός. μετρείτω ὁ Γ. ἐπεὶ ὁ Γ τὸν Β μετρεῖ, measure them. Let C measure (them). Since C measures
ὁ δὲ Α τὸν Β οὐ μετρεῖ, ὁ Γ ἄρα τῷ Α οὔκ ἐστιν ὁ αὐτός. B, and A does not measure B, C is thus not the same as
καὶ ἐπεὶ ὁ Γ τοὺς Β, Α μετρεῖ, καὶ τὸν Α ἄρα μετρεῖ πρῶτον A. And since C measures B and A, it thus also measures
ὄντα μὴ ὢν αὐτῷ ὁ αὐτός· ὅπερ ἐστὶν ἀδύνατον. οὐκ ἄρα A, which is prime, (despite) not being the same as it.
τοὺς Β, Α μετρήσει τις ἀριθμός. οἱ Α, Β ἄρα πρῶτοι πρὸς The very thing is impossible. Thus, some number cannot
ἀλλήλους εἰσίν· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. measure (both) B and A. Thus, A and B are prime to
one another. (Which is) the very thing it was required to
217
STOIQEIWN zþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 7
show.
lþ. Proposition 30
᾿Εὰν δύο ἀριθμοὶ πολλαπλασιάσαντες ἀλλήλους ποιῶσί If two numbers make some (number by) multiplying
τινα, τὸν δὲ γενόμενον ἐξ αὐτῶν μετρῇ τις πρῶτος ἀριθμός, one another, and some prime number measures the numκαὶ ἕνα τῶν ἐξ ἀρχῆς μετρήσει. ber (so) created from them, then it will also measure one
of the original (numbers).
Ε
Α
Β
Γ
∆
E
A
B
C
D
Δύο γὰρ ἀριθμοὶ οἱ Α, Β πολλαπλασιάσαντες ἀλλήλους For let two numbers A and B make C (by) multiplying
τὸν Γ ποιείτωσαν, τὸν δὲ Γ μετρείτω τις πρῶτος ἀριθμὸς ὁ one another, and let some prime number D measure C. I
Δ· λέγω, ὅτι ὁ Δ ἕνα τῶν Α, Β μετρεῖ. say that D measures one of A and B.
Τὸν γὰρ Α μὴ μετρείτω· καί ἐστι πρῶτος ὁ Δ· οἱ Α, For let it not measure A. And since D is prime, A
Δ ἄρα πρῶτοι πρὸς ἀλλήλους εἰσίν. καὶ ὁσάκις ὁ Δ τὸν Γ and D are thus prime to one another [Prop. 7.29]. And
μετρεῖ, τοσαῦται μονάδες ἔστωσαν ἐν τῷ Ε. ἐπεὶ οὖν ὁ Δ as many times as D measures C, so many units let there
τὸν Γ μετρεῖ κατὰ τὰς ἐν τῷ Ε μονάδας, ὁ Δ ἄρα τὸν Ε be in E. Therefore, since D measures C according to
πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Γ πεποίηκεν. ἀλλὰ μὴν καὶ ὁ Α τὸν the units E, D has thus made C (by) multiplying E
Β πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Γ πεποίηκεν· ἴσος ἄρα ἐστὶν ὁ ἐκ [Def. 7.15]. But, in fact, A has also made C (by) multiτῶν Δ, Ε τῷ ἐκ τῶν Α, Β. ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς ὁ Δ πρὸς τὸν Α, plying B. Thus, the (number created) from (multiplying)
οὕτως ὁ Β πρὸς τὸν Ε. οἱ δὲ Δ, Α πρῶτοι, οἱ δὲ πρῶτοι καὶ D and E is equal to the (number created) from (mulἐλάχιστοι, οἱ δὲ ἐλάχιστοι μετροῦσι τοὺς τὸν αὐτὸν λόγον tiplying) A and B. Thus, as D is to A, so B (is) to E
ἔχοντας ἰσάκις ὅ τε μείζων τὸν μείζονα καὶ ὁ ἐλάσσων τὸν [Prop. 7.19]. And D and A (are) prime (to one another),
ἐλάσσονα, τουτέστιν ὅ τε ἡγούμενος τὸν ἡγούμενον καὶ ὁ and (numbers) prime (to one another are) also the least
ἐπόμενος τὸν ἑπόμενον· ὁ Δ ἄρα τὸν Β μετρεῖ. ὁμοίως δὴ (of those numbers having the same ratio) [Prop. 7.21],
δείξομεν, ὅτι καὶ ἐὰν τὸν Β μὴ μετρῇ, τὸν Α μετρήσει. ὁ Δ and the least (numbers) measure those (numbers) havἄρα ἕνα τῶν Α, Β μετρεῖ· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. ing the same ratio (as them) an equal number of times,
the greater (measuring) the greater, and the lesser the
lesser—that is to say, the leading (measuring) the leading, and the following the following [Prop. 7.20]. Thus,
D measures B. So, similarly, we can also show that if
(D) does not measure B then it will measure A. Thus,
D measures one of A and B. (Which is) the very thing it
was required to show.
laþ. Proposition 31
῞Απας σύνθεντος ἀριθμὸς ὑπὸ πρώτου τινὸς ἀριθμοῦ με- Every composite number is measured by some prime
τρεῖται. number.
Let A be a composite number. I say that A is measured
῎Εστω σύνθεντος ἀριθμὸς ὁ Α· λέγω, ὅτι ὁ Α ὑπὸ πρώτου by some prime number.
τινὸς ἀριθμοῦ μετρεῖται. For since A is composite, some number will measure
᾿Επεὶ γὰρ σύνθετός ἐστιν ὁ Α, μετρήσει τις αὐτὸν it. Let it (so) measure (A), and let it be B. And if B
218
STOIQEIWN zþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 7
ἀριθμός. μετρείτω, καὶ ἔστω ὁ Β. καὶ εἰ μὲν πρῶτός ἐστιν ὁ is prime then that which was prescribed has happened.
Β, γεγονὸς ἂν εἴη τὸ ἐπιταχθέν. εἰ δὲ σύνθετος, μετρήσει And if (B is) composite then some number will measure
τις αὐτὸν ἀριθμός. μετρείτω, καὶ ἔστω ὁ Γ. καὶ ἐπεὶ ὁ Γ it. Let it (so) measure (B), and let it be C. And since
τὸν Β μετρεῖ, ὁ δὲ Β τὸν Α μετρεῖ, καὶ ὁ Γ ἄρα τὸν Α C measures B, and B measures A, C thus also measures
μετρεῖ. καὶ εἰ μὲν πρῶτός ἐστιν ὁ Γ, γεγονὸς ἂν εἴη τὸ A. And if C is prime then that which was prescribed has
ἐπιταχθέν. εἰ δὲ σύνθετος, μετρήσει τις αὐτὸν ἀριθμός. happened. And if (C is) composite then some number
τοιαύτης δὴ γινομένης ἐπισκέψεως ληφθήσεταί τις πρῶτος will measure it. So, in this manner of continued invesἀριθμός, ὃς μετρήσει. εἰ γὰρ οὐ ληφθήσεται, μετρήσουσι tigation, some prime number will be found which will
τὸν Α ἀριθμὸν ἄπειροι ἀριθμοί, ὧν ἕτερος ἑτέρου ἐλάσσων measure (the number preceding it, which will also meaἐστίν· ὅπερ ἐστὶν ἀδύνατον ἐν ἀριθμοῖς. ληφθήσεταί τις ἄρα sure A). And if (such a number) cannot be found then an
πρῶτος ἀριθμός, ὃς μετρήσει τὸν πρὸ ἑαυτοῦ, ὃς καὶ τὸν Α infinite (series of) numbers, each of which is less than the
μετρήσει. preceding, will measure the number A. The very thing is
impossible for numbers. Thus, some prime number will
(eventually) be found which will measure the (number)
preceding it, which will also measure A.
Γ
Α
Β
C
A
B
῞Απας ἄρα σύνθεντος ἀριθμὸς ὑπὸ πρώτου τινὸς ἀριθμοῦ Thus, every composite number is measured by some
μετρεῖται· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. prime number. (Which is) the very thing it was required
to show.
lbþ. Proposition 32
῞Απας ἀριθμὸς ἤτοι πρῶτός ἐστιν ἢ ὑπὸ πρώτου τινὸς Every number is either prime or is measured by some
ἀριθμοῦ μετρεῖται. prime number.
Α A
῎Εστω ἀριθμὸς ὁ Α· λέγω, ὅτι ὁ Α ἤτοι πρῶτός ἐστιν ἢ Let A be a number. I say that A is either prime or is
ὑπὸ πρώτου τινὸς ἀριθμοῦ μετρεῖται. measured by some prime number.
Εἰ μὲν οὖν πρῶτός ἐστιν ὁ Α, γεγονὸς ἂν εἴη τό In fact, if A is prime then that which was prescribed
ἐπιταχθέν. εἰ δὲ σύνθετος, μετρήσει τις αὐτὸν πρῶτος has happened. And if (it is) composite then some prime
ἀριθμός. number will measure it [Prop. 7.31].
῞Απας ἄρα ἀριθμὸς ἤτοι πρῶτός ἐστιν ἢ ὑπὸ πρώτου Thus, every number is either prime or is measured
τινὸς ἀριθμοῦ μετρεῖται· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. by some prime number. (Which is) the very thing it was
required to show.
lgþ. Proposition 33
᾿Αριθμῶν δοθέντων ὁποσωνοῦν εὑρεῖν τοὺς ἐλαχίστους To find the least of those (numbers) having the same
τῶν τὸν αὐτὸν λόγον ἐχόντων αὐτοῖς. ratio as any given multitude of numbers.
῎Εστωσαν οἱ δοθέντες ὁποσοιοῦν ἀριθμοὶ οἱ Α, Β, Γ· δεῖ Let A, B, and C be any given multitude of numbers.
δὴ εὑρεῖν τοὺς ἐλαχίστους τῶν τὸν αὐτὸν λόγον ἐχόντων So it is required to find the least of those (numbers) havτοῖς Α, Β, Γ. ing the same ratio as A, B, and C.
Οἱ Α, Β, Γ γὰρ ἤτοι πρῶτοι πρὸς ἀλλήλους εἰσὶν ἢ οὔ. For A, B, and C are either prime to one another, or
εἰ μὲν οὖν οἱ Α, Β, Γ πρῶτοι πρὸς ἀλλήλους εἰσίν, ἐλάχιστοί not. In fact, if A, B, and C are prime to one another then
εἰσι τῶν τὸν αὐτὸν λόγον ἐχόντων αὐτοῖς. they are the least of those (numbers) having the same
ratio as them [Prop. 7.22].
219
STOIQEIWN zþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 7
Α Β Γ ∆ Ε Ζ Η Θ Κ Λ Μ A B C D E F G H K L M
Εἰ δὲ οὔ, εἰλήφθω τῶν Α, Β, Γ τὸ μέγιστον κοινὸν And if not, let the greatest common measure, D, of
μέτρον ὁ Δ, καὶ ὁσάκις ὁ Δ ἕκαστον τῶν Α, Β, Γ μετρεῖ, A, B, and C have be taken [Prop. 7.3]. And as many
τοσαῦται μονάδες ἔστωσαν ἐν ἑκάστῳ τῶν Ε, Ζ, Η. καὶ times as D measures A, B, C, so many units let there
ἕκαστος ἄρα τῶν Ε, Ζ, Η ἕκαστον τῶν Α, Β, Γ μετρεῖ κατὰ be in E, F, G, respectively. And thus E, F, G meaτὰς ἐν τῷ Δ μονάδας. οἱ Ε, Ζ, Η ἄρα τοὺς Α, Β, Γ ἰσάκις sure A, B, C, respectively, according to the units in D
μετροῦσιν· οἱ Ε, Ζ, Η ἄρα τοῖς Α, Β, Γ ἐν τῷ αὐτῷ λόγῳ [Prop. 7.15]. Thus, E, F, G measure A, B, C (respecεἰσίν. λέγω δή, ὅτι καὶ ἐλάχιστοι. εἰ γὰρ μή εἰσιν οἱ Ε, Ζ, tively) an equal number of times. Thus, E, F, G are in
Η ἐλάχιστοι τῶν τὸν αὐτὸν λόγον ἐχόντων τοῖς Α, Β, Γ, the same ratio as A, B, C (respectively) [Def. 7.20]. So I
ἔσονται [τινες] τῶν Ε, Ζ, Η ἐλάσσονες ἀριθμοὶ ἐν τῷ αὐτῷ say that (they are) also the least (of those numbers havλόγῳ ὄντες τοῖς Α, Β, Γ. ἔστωσαν οἱ Θ, Κ, Λ· ἰσάκις ἄρα ὁ ing the same ratio as A, B, C). For if E, F, G are not
Θ τὸν Α μετρεῖ καὶ ἑκάτερος τῶν Κ, Λ ἑκάτερον τῶν Β, Γ. the least of those (numbers) having the same ratio as A,
ὁσάκις δὲ ὁ Θ τὸν Α μετρεῖ, τοσαῦται μονάδες ἔστωσαν ἐν B, C (respectively), then there will be [some] numbers
τῷ Μ· καὶ ἑκάτερος ἄρα τῶν Κ, Λ ἑκάτερον τῶν Β, Γ μετρεῖ less than E, F, G which are in the same ratio as A, B, C
κατὰ τὰς ἐν τῷ Μ μονάδας. καὶ ἐπεὶ ὁ Θ τὸν Α μετρεῖ κατὰ (respectively). Let them be H, K, L. Thus, H measures
τὰς ἐν τῷ Μ μονάδας, καὶ ὁ Μ ἄρα τὸν Α μετρεῖ κατὰ τὰς A the same number of times that K, L also measure B,
ἐν τῷ Θ μονάδας. διὰ τὰ αὐτὰ δὴ ὁ Μ καὶ ἑκάτερον τῶν Β, C, respectively. And as many times as H measures A, so
Γ μετρεῖ κατὰ τὰς ἐν ἑκατέρῳ τῶν Κ, Λ μονάδας· ὁ Μ ἄρα many units let there be in M. Thus, K, L measure B,
τοὺς Α, Β, Γ μετρεῖ. καὶ ἐπεὶ ὁ Θ τὸν Α μετρεῖ κατὰ τὰς C, respectively, according to the units in M. And since
ἐν τῷ Μ μονάδας, ὁ Θ ἄρα τὸν Μ πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Α H measures A according to the units in M, M thus also
πεποίηκεν. διὰ τὰ αὐτὰ δὴ καὶ ὁ Ε τὸν Δ πολλαπλασιάσας measures A according to the units in H [Prop. 7.15]. So,
τὸν Α πεποίηκεν. ἴσος ἄρα ἐστὶν ὁ ἐκ τῶν Ε, Δ τῷ ἐκ for the same (reasons), M also measures B, C accordτῶν Θ, Μ. ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς ὁ Ε πρὸς τὸν Θ, οὕτως ὁ Μ πρὸς ing to the units in K, L, respectively. Thus, M measures
τὸν Δ. μείζων δὲ ὁ Ε τοῦ Θ· μείζων ἄρα καὶ ὁ Μ τοῦ Δ. A, B, and C. And since H measures A according to the
καὶ μετρεῖ τοὺς Α, Β, Γ· ὅπερ ἐστὶν ἀδύνατον· ὑπόκειται units in M, H has thus made A (by) multiplying M. So,
γὰρ ὁ Δ τῶν Α, Β, Γ τὸ μέγιστον κοινὸν μέτρον. οὐκ ἄρα for the same (reasons), E has also made A (by) multiplyἔσονταί τινες τῶν Ε, Ζ, Η ἐλάσσονες ἀριθμοὶ ἐν τῷ αὐτῷ ing D. Thus, the (number created) from (multiplying)
λόγῳ ὄντες τοῖς Α, Β, Γ. οἱ Ε, Ζ, Η ἄρα ἐλάχιστοί εἰσι τῶν E and D is equal to the (number created) from (multiτὸν αὐτὸν λόγον ἐχόντων τοῖς Α, Β, Γ· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. plying) H and M. Thus, as E (is) to H, so M (is) to
D [Prop. 7.19]. And E (is) greater than H. Thus, M
(is) also greater than D [Prop. 5.13]. And (M) measures
A, B, and C. The very thing is impossible. For D was
assumed (to be) the greatest common measure of A, B,
and C. Thus, there cannot be any numbers less than E,
F, G which are in the same ratio as A, B, C (respectively). Thus, E, F, G are the least of (those numbers)
having the same ratio as A, B, C (respectively). (Which
is) the very thing it was required to show.
ldþ. Proposition 34
Δύο ἀριθμῶν δοθέντων εὑρεῖν, ὃν ἐλάχιστον μετροῦσιν To find the least number which two given numbers
ἀριθμόν. (both) measure.
῎Εστωσαν οἱ δοθέντες δύο ἀριθμοὶ οἱ Α, Β· δεῖ δὴ εὑρεῖν, Let A and B be the two given numbers. So it is re220
STOIQEIWN zþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 7
ὃν ἐλάχιστον μετροῦσιν ἀριθμόν. quired to find the least number which they (both) measure.
Ζ
Α Β
Γ
∆
Ε F
A B
C
D
E
Οἱ Α, Β γὰρ ἤτοι πρῶτοι πρὸς ἀλλήλους εἰσὶν ἢ οὔ. For A and B are either prime to one another, or not.
ἔστωσαν πρότερον οἱ Α, Β πρῶτοι πρὸς ἀλλήλους, καὶ ὁ Α Let them, first of all, be prime to one another. And let A
τὸν Β πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Γ ποιείτω· καὶ ὁ Β ἄρα τὸν Α make C (by) multiplying B. Thus, B has also made C
πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Γ πεποίηκεν. οἱ Α, Β ἄρα τὸν Γ με- (by) multiplying A [Prop. 7.16]. Thus, A and B (both)
τροῦσιν. λέγω δή, ὅτι καὶ ἐλάχιστον. εἰ γὰρ μή, μετρήσουσί measure C. So I say that (C) is also the least (numτινα ἀριθμὸν οἱ Α, Β ἐλάσσονα ὄντα τοῦ Γ. μετρείτωσαν ber which they both measure). For if not, A and B will
τὸν Δ. καὶ ὁσάκις ὁ Α τὸν Δ μετρεῖ, τοσαῦται μονάδες (both) measure some (other) number which is less than
ἔστωσαν ἐν τῷ Ε, ὁσάκις δὲ ὁ Β τὸν Δ μετρεῖ, τοσαῦται C. Let them (both) measure D (which is less than C).
μονάδες ἔστωσαν ἐν τῷ Ζ. ὁ μὲν Α ἄρα τὸν Ε πολλα- And as many times as A measures D, so many units let
πλασιάσας τὸν Δ πεποίηκεν, ὁ δὲ Β τὸν Ζ πολλαπλασιάσας there be in E. And as many times as B measures D,
τὸν Δ πεποίηκεν· ἴσος ἄρα ἐστὶν ὁ ἐκ τῶν Α, Ε τῷ ἐκ τῶν so many units let there be in F. Thus, A has made D
Β, Ζ. ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν Β, οὕτως ὁ Ζ πρὸς τὸν (by) multiplying E, and B has made D (by) multiplyΕ. οἱ δὲ Α, Β πρῶτοι, οἱ δὲ πρῶτοι καὶ ἐλάχιστοι, οἱ δὲ ing F. Thus, the (number created) from (multiplying)
ἐλάχιστοι μετροῦσι τοὺς τὸν αὐτὸν λόγον ἔχοντας ἰσάκις ὅ A and E is equal to the (number created) from (multiτε μείζων τὸν μείζονα καὶ ὁ ἐλάσσων τὸν ἐλάσσονα· ὁ Β plying) B and F. Thus, as A (is) to B, so F (is) to E
ἄρα τὸν Ε μετρεῖ, ὡς ἑπόμενος ἑπόμενον. καὶ ἐπεὶ ὁ Α τοὺς [Prop. 7.19]. And A and B are prime (to one another),
Β, Ε πολλαπλασιάσας τοὺς Γ, Δ πεποίηκεν, ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς and prime (numbers) are the least (of those numbers
ὁ Β πρὸς τὸν Ε, οὕτως ὁ Γ πρὸς τὸν Δ. μετρεῖ δὲ ὁ Β τὸν having the same ratio) [Prop. 7.21], and the least (numΕ· μετρεῖ ἄρα καὶ ὁ Γ τὸν Δ ὁ μείζων τὸν ἐλάσσονα· ὅπερ bers) measure those (numbers) having the same ratio (as
ἐστὶν ἀδύνατον. οὐκ ἄρα οἱ Α, Β μετροῦσί τινα ἀριθμὸν them) an equal number of times, the greater (measuring)
ἐλάσσονα ὄντα τοῦ Γ. ὁ Γ ἄρα ἐλάχιστος ὢν ὑπὸ τῶν Α, Β the greater, and the lesser the lesser [Prop. 7.20]. Thus,
μετρεῖται. B measures E, as the following (number measuring) the
following. And since A has made C and D (by) multiplying B and E (respectively), thus as B is to E, so C
(is) to D [Prop. 7.17]. And B measures E. Thus, C also
measures D, the greater (measuring) the lesser. The very
thing is impossible. Thus, A and B do not (both) measure some number which is less than C. Thus, C is the
least (number) which is measured by (both) A and B.
Θ
Α
Ζ
Γ
∆
Η
Β
Ε
H
A
D
B
F E
C
G
Μὴ ἔστωσαν δὴ οἱ Α, Β πρῶτοι πρὸς ἀλλήλους, So let A and B be not prime to one another. And
καὶ εἰλήφθωσαν ἐλάχιστοι ἀριθμοὶ τῶν τὸν αὐτὸν λόγον let the least numbers, F and E, have been taken having
ἐχόντων τοῖς Α, Β οἱ Ζ, Ε· ἴσος ἄρα ἐστὶν ὁ ἐκ τῶν Α, Ε τῷ the same ratio as A and B (respectively) [Prop. 7.33].
221
STOIQEIWN zþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 7
ἐκ τῶν Β, Ζ. καὶ ὁ Α τὸν Ε πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Γ ποιείτω· Thus, the (number created) from (multiplying) A and E
καὶ ὁ Β ἄρα τὸν Ζ πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Γ πεποίηκεν· οἱ Α, is equal to the (number created) from (multiplying) B
Β ἄρα τὸν Γ μετροῦσιν. λέγω δή, ὅτι καὶ ἐλάχιστον. εἰ γὰρ and F [Prop. 7.19]. And let A make C (by) multiplying
μή, μετρήσουσί τινα ἀριθμὸν οἱ Α, Β ἐλάσσονα ὄντα τοῦ E. Thus, B has also made C (by) multiplying F. Thus,
Γ. μετρείτωσαν τὸν Δ. καὶ ὁσάκις μὲν ὁ Α τὸν Δ μετρεῖ, A and B (both) measure C. So I say that (C) is also the
τοσαῦται μονάδες ἔστωσαν ἐν τῷ Η, ὁσάκις δὲ ὁ Β τὸν Δ least (number which they both measure). For if not, A
μετρεῖ, τοσαῦται μονάδες ἔστωσαν ἐν τῷ Θ. ὁ μὲν Α ἄρα and B will (both) measure some number which is less
τὸν Η πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Δ πεποίηκεν, ὁ δὲ Β τὸν Θ than C. Let them (both) measure D (which is less than
πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Δ πεποίηκεν. ἴσος ἄρα ἐστὶν ὁ ἐκ τῶν C). And as many times as A measures D, so many units
Α, Η τῷ ἐκ τῶν Β, Θ· ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν Β, οὕτως let there be in G. And as many times as B measures D,
ὁ Θ πρὸς τὸν Η. ὡς δὲ ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν Β, οὕτως ὁ Ζ πρὸς so many units let there be in H. Thus, A has made D
τὸν Ε· καὶ ὡς ἄρα ὁ Ζ πρὸς τὸν Ε, οὕτως ὁ Θ πρὸς τὸν (by) multiplying G, and B has made D (by) multiplying
Η. οἱ δὲ Ζ, Ε ἐλάχιστοι, οἱ δὲ ἐλάχιστοι μετροῦσι τοὺς τὸν H. Thus, the (number created) from (multiplying) A and
αὐτὸν λόγον ἔχοντας ἰσάκις ὅ τε μείζων τὸν μείζονα καὶ ὁ G is equal to the (number created) from (multiplying) B
ἐλάσσων τὸν ἐλάσσονα· ὁ Ε ἄρα τὸν Η μετρεῖ. καὶ ἐπεὶ ὁ and H. Thus, as A is to B, so H (is) to G [Prop. 7.19].
Α τοὺς Ε, Η πολλαπλασιάσας τοὺς Γ, Δ πεποίηκεν, ἔστιν And as A (is) to B, so F (is) to E. Thus, also, as F (is)
ἄρα ὡς ὁ Ε πρὸς τὸν Η, οὕτως ὁ Γ πρὸς τὸν Δ. ὁ δὲ Ε τὸν to E, so H (is) to G. And F and E are the least (numΗ μετρεῖ· καὶ ὁ Γ ἄρα τὸν Δ μετρεῖ ὁ μείζων τὸν ἐλάσσονα· bers having the same ratio as A and B), and the least
ὅπερ ἐστὶν ἀδύνατον. οὐκ ἄρα οἱ Α, Β μετρήσουσί τινα (numbers) measure those (numbers) having the same raἀριθμὸν ἐλάσσονα ὄντα τοῦ Γ. ὁ Γ ἄρα ἐλάχιστος ὢν ὑπὸ tio an equal number of times, the greater (measuring)
τῶν Α, Β μετρεῖται· ὅπερ ἔπει δεῖξαι. the greater, and the lesser the lesser [Prop. 7.20]. Thus,
E measures G. And since A has made C and D (by) multiplying E and G (respectively), thus as E is to G, so C
(is) to D [Prop. 7.17]. And E measures G. Thus, C also
measures D, the greater (measuring) the lesser. The very
thing is impossible. Thus, A and B do not (both) measure some (number) which is less than C. Thus, C (is)
the least (number) which is measured by (both) A and
B. (Which is) the very thing it was required to show.
leþ. Proposition 35
᾿Εὰν δύο ἀριθμοὶ ἀριθμόν τινα μετρῶσιν, καὶ ὁ ἐλάχιστος If two numbers (both) measure some number then the
ὑπ᾿ αὐτῶν μετρούμενος τὸν αὐτὸν μετρήσει. least (number) measured by them will also measure the
same (number).
∆
Α Β
Ε
Γ Ζ D
A B
E
C F
Δύο γὰρ ἀριθμοὶ οἱ Α, Β ἀριθμόν τινα τὸν ΓΔ με- For let two numbers, A and B, (both) measure some
τρείτωσαν, ἐλάχιστον δὲ τὸν Ε· λέγω, ὅτι καὶ ὁ Ε τὸν ΓΔ number CD, and (let) E (be the) least (number meaμετρεῖ. sured by both A and B). I say that E also measures CD.
Εἰ γὰρ οὐ μετρεῖ ὁ Ε τὸν ΓΔ, ὁ Ε τὸν ΔΖ μετρῶν For if E does not measure CD then let E leave CF
λειπέτω ἑαυτοῦ ἐλάσσονα τὸν ΓΖ. καὶ ἐπεὶ οἱ Α, Β τὸν Ε less than itself (in) measuring DF. And since A and B
μετροῦσιν, ὁ δὲ Ε τὸν ΔΖ μετρεῖ, καὶ οἱ Α, Β ἄρα τὸν (both) measure E, and E measures DF, A and B will
ΔΖ μετρήσουσιν. μετροῦσι δὲ καὶ ὅλον τὸν ΓΔ· καὶ λοιπὸν thus also measure DF. And (A and B) also measure the
ἄρα τὸν ΓΖ μετρήσουσιν ἐλάσσονα ὄντα τοῦ Ε· ὅπερ ἐστὶν whole of CD. Thus, they will also measure the remainder
ἀδύνατον. οὐκ ἄρα οὐ μετρεῖ ὁ Ε τὸν ΓΔ· μετρεῖ ἄρα· ὅπερ CF, which is less than E. The very thing is impossible.
ἔδει δεῖξαι. Thus, E cannot not measure CD. Thus, (E) measures
222
STOIQEIWN zþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 7
(CD). (Which is) the very thing it was required to show.
lþ. Proposition 36
Τριῶν ἀριθμῶν δοθέντων εὑρεῖν, ὃν ἐλάχιστον με- To find the least number which three given numbers
τροῦσιν ἀριθμόν. (all) measure.
῎Εστωσαν οἱ δοθέντες τρεῖς ἀριθμοὶ οἱ Α, Β, Γ· δεῖ δὴ Let A, B, and C be the three given numbers. So it is
εὑρεῖν, ὃν ἐλάχιστον μετροῦσιν ἀριθμόν. required to find the least number which they (all) measure.
Ζ
Α
Β
Γ
∆
Ε
F
A
B
C
D
E
Εἰλήφθω γὰρ ὑπὸ δύο τῶν Α, Β ἐλάχιστος μετρούμενος For let the least (number), D, measured by the two
ὁ Δ. ὁ δὴ Γ τὸν Δ ἤτοι μετρεῖ ἢ οὐ μετρεῖ. μετρείτω (numbers) A and B have been taken [Prop. 7.34]. So C
πρότερον. μετροῦσι δὲ καὶ οἱ Α, Β τὸν Δ· οἱ Α, Β, Γ either measures, or does not measure, D. Let it, first of
ἄρα τὸν Δ μετροῦσιν. λέγω δή, ὅτι καὶ ἐλάχιστον. εἰ γὰρ all, measure (D). And A and B also measure D. Thus,
μή, μετρήσουσιν [τινα] ἀριθμὸν οἱ Α, Β, Γ ἐλάσσονα ὄντα A, B, and C (all) measure D. So I say that (D is) also
τοῦ Δ. μετρείτωσαν τὸν Ε. ἐπεὶ οἱ Α, Β, Γ τὸν Ε μετροῦσιν, the least (number measured by A, B, and C). For if not,
καὶ οἱ Α, Β ἄρα τὸν Ε μετροῦσιν. καὶ ὁ ἐλάχιστος ἄρα ὑπὸ A, B, and C will (all) measure [some] number which
τῶν Α, Β μετρούμενος [τὸν Ε] μετρήσει. ἐλάχιστος δὲ ὑπὸ is less than D. Let them measure E (which is less than
τῶν Α, Β μετρούμενός ἐστιν ὁ Δ· ὁ Δ ἄρα τὸν Ε μετρήσει D). Since A, B, and C (all) measure E then A and B
ὁ μείζων τὸν ἐλάσσονα· ὅπερ ἐστὶν ἀδύνατον. οὐκ ἄρα οἱ thus also measure E. Thus, the least (number) measured
Α, Β, Γ μετρήσουσί τινα ἀριθμὸν ἐλάσσονα ὄντα τοῦ Δ· οἱ by A and B will also measure [E] [Prop. 7.35]. And D
Α, Β, Γ ἄρα ἐλάχιστον τὸν Δ μετροῦσιν. is the least (number) measured by A and B. Thus, D
Μὴ μετρείτω δὴ πάλιν ὁ Γ τὸν Δ, καὶ εἰλήφθω ὑπὸ τῶν will measure E, the greater (measuring) the lesser. The
Γ, Δ ἐλάχιστος μετρούμενος ἀριθμὸς ὁ Ε. ἐπεὶ οἱ Α, Β very thing is impossible. Thus, A, B, and C cannot (all)
τὸν Δ μετροῦσιν, ὁ δὲ Δ τὸν Ε μετρεῖ, καὶ οἱ Α, Β ἄρα measure some number which is less than D. Thus, A, B,
τὸν Ε μετροῦσιν. μετρεῖ δὲ καὶ ὁ Γ [τὸν Ε· καὶ] οἱ Α, Β, and C (all) measure the least (number) D.
Γ ἄρα τὸν Ε μετροῦσιν. λέγω δή, ὅτι καὶ ἐλάχιστον. εἰ So, again, let C not measure D. And let the least
γὰρ μή, μετρήσουσί τινα οἱ Α, Β, Γ ἐλάσσονα ὄντα τοῦ Ε. number, E, measured by C and D have been taken
μετρείτωσαν τὸν Ζ. ἐπεὶ οἱ Α, Β, Γ τὸν Ζ μετροῦσιν, καὶ οἱ [Prop. 7.34]. Since A and B measure D, and D measures
Α, Β ἄρα τὸν Ζ μετροῦσιν· καὶ ὁ ἐλάχιστος ἄρα ὑπὸ τῶν E, A and B thus also measure E. And C also measures
Α, Β μετρούμενος τὸν Ζ μετρήσει. ἐλάχιστος δὲ ὑπὸ τῶν [E]. Thus, A, B, and C [also] measure E. So I say that
Α, Β μετρούμενός ἐστιν ὁ Δ· ὁ Δ ἄρα τὸν Ζ μετρεῖ. μετρεῖ (E is) also the least (number measured by A, B, and C).
δὲ καὶ ὁ Γ τὸν Ζ· οἱ Δ, Γ ἄρα τὸν Ζ μετροῦσιν· ὥστε καὶ ὁ For if not, A, B, and C will (all) measure some (number)
ἐλάχιστος ὑπὸ τῶν Δ, Γ μετρούμενος τὸν Ζ μετρήσει. ὁ δὲ which is less than E. Let them measure F (which is less
ἐλάχιστος ὑπὸ τῶν Γ, Δ μετρούμενός ἐστιν ὁ Ε· ὁ Ε ἄρα than E). Since A, B, and C (all) measure F, A and B
τὸν Ζ μετρεῖ ὁ μείζων τὸν ἐλάσσονα· ὅπερ ἐστὶν ἀδύνατον. thus also measure F. Thus, the least (number) measured
οὐκ ἄρα οἱ Α, Β, Γ μετρήσουσί τινα ἀριθμὸν ἐλάσσονα ὄντα by A and B will also measure F [Prop. 7.35]. And D
τοῦ Ε. ὁ Ε ἄρα ἐλάχιστος ὢν ὑπὸ τῶν Α, Β, Γ μετρεῖται· is the least (number) measured by A and B. Thus, D
ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. measures F. And C also measures F. Thus, D and C
(both) measure F. Hence, the least (number) measured
by D and C will also measure F [Prop. 7.35]. And E
223
STOIQEIWN zþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 7
is the least (number) measured by C and D. Thus, E
measures F, the greater (measuring) the lesser. The very
thing is impossible. Thus, A, B, and C cannot measure
some number which is less than E. Thus, E (is) the least
(number) which is measured by A, B, and C. (Which is)
the very thing it was required to show.
lzþ. Proposition 37
᾿Εὰν ἀριθμὸς ὑπό τινος ἀριθμοῦ μετρῆται, ὁ μετρούμενος If a number is measured by some number then the
ὁμώνυμον μέρος ἕξει τῷ μετροῦντι. (number) measured will have a part called the same as
the measuring (number).
Α
Β
Γ
∆ D
B
A
C
᾿Αριθμὸς γάρ ὁ Α ὑπό τινος ἀριθμοῦ τοῦ Β μετρείσθω· For let the number A be measured by some number
λέγω, ὅτι ὁ Α ὁμώνυμον μέρος ἔχει τῷ Β. B. I say that A has a part called the same as B.
῾Οσάκις γὰρ ὁ Β τὸν Α μετρεῖ, τοσαῦται μονάδες ἔστω- For as many times as B measures A, so many units
σαν ἐν τῷ Γ. ἐπεὶ ὁ Β τὸν Α μετρεῖ κατὰ τὰς ἐν τῷ Γ let there be in C. Since B measures A according to the
μονάδας, μετρεῖ δὲ καὶ ἡ Δ μονὰς τὸν Γ ἀριθμὸν κατὰ τὰς units in C, and the unit D also measures C according
ἐν αὐτῷ μονάδας, ἰσάκις ἄρα ἡ Δ μονὰς τὸν Γ ἀριθμὸν με- to the units in it, the unit D thus measures the number
τρεῖ καὶ ὁ Β τὸν Α. ἐναλλὰξ ἄρα ἰσάκις ἡ Δ μονὰς τὸν Β C as many times as B (measures) A. Thus, alternately,
ἀριθμὸν μετρεῖ καὶ ὁ Γ τὸν Α· ὃ ἄρα μέρος ἐστὶν ἡ Δ μονὰς the unit D measures the number B as many times as C
τοῦ Β ἀριθμοῦ, τὸ αὐτὸ μέρος ἐστὶ καὶ ὁ Γ τοῦ Α. ἡ δὲ Δ (measures) A [Prop. 7.15]. Thus, which(ever) part the
μονὰς τοῦ Β ἀριθμοῦ μέρος ἐστὶν ὁμώνυμον αὐτῷ· καὶ ὁ Γ unit D is of the number B, C is also the same part of A.
ἄρα τοῦ Α μέρος ἐστὶν ὁμώνυμον τῷ Β. ὥστε ὁ Α μέρος And the unit D is a part of the number B called the same
ἔχει τὸν Γ ὁμώνυμον ὄντα τῷ Β· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. as it (i.e., a Bth part). Thus, C is also a part of A called
the same as B (i.e., C is the Bth part of A). Hence, A has
a part C which is called the same as B (i.e., A has a Bth
part). (Which is) the very thing it was required to show.
lhþ. Proposition 38
᾿Εὰν ἀριθμος μέρος ἔχῃ ὁτιοῦν, ὑπὸ ὁμωνύμου ἀριθμοῦ If a number has any part whatever then it will be meaμετρηθήσεται τῷ μέρει. sured by a number called the same as the part.
∆
Α
Β
Γ
D
A
B
C
᾿Αριθμὸς γὰρ ὁ Α μέρος ἐχέτω ὁτιοῦν τὸν Β, καὶ τῷ Β For let the number A have any part whatever, B. And
μέρει ὁμώνυμος ἔστω [ἀριθμὸς] ὁ Γ· λέγω, ὅτι ὁ Γ τὸν Α let the [number] C be called the same as the part B (i.e.,
μετρεῖ. B is the Cth part of A). I say that C measures A.
᾿Επεὶ γὰρ ὁ Β τοῦ Α μέρος ἐστὶν ὁμώνυμον τῷ Γ, ἔστι For since B is a part of A called the same as C, and
δὲ καὶ ἡ Δ μονὰς τοῦ Γ μέρος ὁμώνυμον αὐτῷ, ὃ ἄρα μέρος the unit D is also a part of C called the same as it (i.e.,
224
STOIQEIWN zþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 7
ἐστὶν ἡ Δ μονὰς τοῦ Γ ἀριθμοῦ, τὸ αὐτὸ μέρος ἐστὶ καὶ ὁ Β D is the Cth part of C), thus which(ever) part the unit D
τοῦ Α· ἰσάκις ἄρα ἡ Δ μονὰς τὸν Γ ἀριθμὸν μετρεῖ καὶ ὁ Β is of the number C, B is also the same part of A. Thus,
τὸν Α. ἐναλλὰξ ἄρα ἰσάκις ἡ Δ μονὰς τὸν Β ἀριθμὸν μετρεῖ the unit D measures the number C as many times as B
καὶ ὁ Γ τὸν Α. ὁ Γ ἄρα τὸν Α μετρεῖ· ὅπερ ἔδει δεὶξαι. (measures) A. Thus, alternately, the unit D measures the
number B as many times as C (measures) A [Prop. 7.15].
Thus, C measures A. (Which is) the very thing it was
required to show.
ljþ. Proposition 39
᾿Αριθμὸν εὐρεῖν, ὃς ἐλάχιστος ὢν ἕξει τὰ δοθέντα μέρη. To find the least number that will have given parts.
Η
Θ
Α Β Γ
∆ Ε
Ζ
H
A B C
D E
F
G
῎Εστω τὰ δοθέντα μέρη τὰ Α, Β, Γ· δεῖ δὴ ἀριθμὸν Let A, B, and C be the given parts. So it is required
εὑρεῖν, ὃς ἐλάχιστος ὢν ἕξει τὰ Α, Β, Γ μέρη. to find the least number which will have the parts A, B,
῎Εστωσαν γὰρ τοῖς Α, Β, Γ μέρεσιν ὁμώνυμοι ἀριθμοὶ and C (i.e., an Ath part, a Bth part, and a Cth part).
οἱ Δ, Ε, Ζ, καὶ εἰλήφθω ὑπὸ τῶν Δ, Ε, Ζ ἐλάχιστος με- For let D, E, and F be numbers having the same
τρούμενος ἀριθμὸς ὁ Η. names as the parts A, B, and C (respectively). And let
῾Ο Η ἄρα ὁμώνυμα μέρη ἔχει τοῖς Δ, Ε, Ζ. τοῖς δὲ Δ, the least number, G, measured by D, E, and F, have
Ε, Ζ ὁμώνυμα μέρη ἐστὶ τὰ Α, Β, Γ· ὁ Η ἄρα ἔχει τὰ Α, Β, been taken [Prop. 7.36].
Γ μέρη. λέγω δή, ὅτι καὶ ἐλάχιστος ὤν, εἰ γὰρ μή, ἔσται τις Thus, G has parts called the same as D, E, and F
τοῦ Η ἐλάσσων ἀριθμός, ὃς ἕξει τὰ Α, Β, Γ μέρη. ἔστω ὁ [Prop. 7.37]. And A, B, and C are parts called the same
Θ. ἐπεὶ ὁ Θ ἔχει τὰ Α, Β, Γ μέρη, ὁ Θ ἄρα ὑπὸ ὁμωνύμων as D, E, and F (respectively). Thus, G has the parts A,
ἀριθμῶν μετρηθήσεται τοῖς Α, Β, Γ μέρεσιν. τοῖς δὲ Α, Β, B, and C. So I say that (G) is also the least (number
Γ μέρεσιν ὁμώνυμοι ἀριθμοί εἰσιν οἱ Δ, Ε, Ζ· ὁ Θ ἄρα ὑπὸ having the parts A, B, and C). For if not, there will be
τῶν Δ, Ε, Ζ μετρεῖται. καί ἐστιν ἐλάσσων τοῦ Η· ὅπερ some number less than G which will have the parts A,
ἐστὶν ἀδύνατον. οὐκ ἄρα ἔσται τις τοῦ Η ἐλάσσων ἀριθμός, B, and C. Let it be H. Since H has the parts A, B, and
ὃς ἕξει τὰ Α, Β, Γ μέρη· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. C, H will thus be measured by numbers called the same
as the parts A, B, and C [Prop. 7.38]. And D, E, and
F are numbers called the same as the parts A, B, and C
(respectively). Thus, H is measured by D, E, and F. And
(H) is less than G. The very thing is impossible. Thus,
there cannot be some number less than G which will have
the parts A, B, and C. (Which is) the very thing it was
required to show.
225
226
ELEMENTS BOOK 8
Continued Proportion†
†The propositions contained in Books 7–9 are generally attributed to the school of Pythagoras.
227
STOIQEIWN hþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 8
aþ. Proposition 1
᾿Εὰν ὦσιν ὁσοιδηποτοῦν ἀριθμοὶ ἑξῆς ἀνάλογον, οἱ δὲ If there are any multitude whatsoever of continuously
ἄκροι αὐτῶν πρῶτοι πρὸς ἀλλήλους ὦσιν, ἐλάχιστοί εἰσι proportional numbers, and the outermost of them are
τῶν τὸν αὐτὸν λόγον ἐχόντων αὐτοῖς. prime to one another, then the (numbers) are the least
of those (numbers) having the same ratio as them.
Θ
Α
Β
Γ
∆
Ε
Ζ
Η
H
A E
B
C
D
F
G
῎Εστωσαν ὁποσοιοῦν ἀριθμοὶ ἑξῆς ἀνάλογον οἱ Α, Β, Let A, B, C, D be any multitude whatsoever of conΓ, Δ, οἱ δὲ ἄκροι αὐτῶν οἱ Α, Δ, πρῶτοι πρὸς ἀλλήλους tinuously proportional numbers. And let the outermost
ἔστωσαν· λέγω, ὅτι οἱ Α, Β, Γ, Δ ἐλάχιστοί εἰσι τῶν τὸν of them, A and D, be prime to one another. I say that
αὐτὸν λόγον ἐχόντων αὐτοῖς. A, B, C, D are the least of those (numbers) having the
Εἰ γὰρ μή, ἔστωσαν ἐλάττονες τῶν Α, Β, Γ, Δ οἱ Ε, same ratio as them.
Ζ, Η, Θ ἐν τῷ αὐτῷ λόγῳ ὄντες αὐτοῖς. καὶ ἐπεὶ οἱ Α, For if not, let E, F, G, H be less than A, B, C, D
Β, Γ, Δ ἐν τῷ αὐτῷ λόγῳ εἰσὶ τοῖς Ε, Ζ, Η, Θ, καί ἐστιν (respectively), being in the same ratio as them. And since
ἴσον τὸ πλῆθος [τῶν Α, Β, Γ, Δ] τῷ πλήθει [τῶν Ε, Ζ, Η, A, B, C, D are in the same ratio as E, F, G, H, and the
Θ], δι᾿ ἴσου ἄρα ἐστὶν ὡς ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν Δ, ὁ Ε πρὸς τὸν multitude [of A, B, C, D] is equal to the multitude [of E,
Θ. οἱ δὲ Α, Δ πρῶτοι, οἱ δὲ πρῶτοι καὶ ἐλάχιστοι, οἱ δὲ F, G, H], thus, via equality, as A is to D, (so) E (is) to H
ἐλάχιστοι ἀριθμοὶ μετροῦσι τοὺς τὸν αὐτὸν λόγον ἔχοντας [Prop. 7.14]. And A and D (are) prime (to one another).
ἰσάκις ὅ τε μείζων τὸν μείζονα καὶ ὁ ἐλάσσων τὸν ἐλάσσονα, And prime (numbers are) also the least of those (numbers
τουτέστιν ὅ τε ἡγούμενος τὸν ἡγούμενον καὶ ὁ ἑπόμενος having the same ratio as them) [Prop. 7.21]. And the
τὸν ἑπόμενον. μετρεῖ ἄρα ὁ Α τὸν Ε ὁ μείζων τὸν ἐλάσσονα· least numbers measure those (numbers) having the same
ὅπερ ἐστὶν ἀδύνατον. οὐκ ἄρα οἱ Ε, Ζ, Η, Θ ἐλάσσονες ratio (as them) an equal number of times, the greater
ὄντες τῶν Α, Β, Γ, Δ ἐν τῷ αὐτῷ λόγῳ εἰσὶν αὐτοῖς. οἱ Α, (measuring) the greater, and the lesser the lesser—that
Β, Γ, Δ ἄρα ἐλάχιστοί εἰσι τῶν τὸν αὐτὸν λόγον ἐχόντων is to say, the leading (measuring) the leading, and the
αὐτοῖς· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. following the following [Prop. 7.20]. Thus, A measures
E, the greater (measuring) the lesser. The very thing is
impossible. Thus, E, F, G, H, being less than A, B, C,
D, are not in the same ratio as them. Thus, A, B, C, D
are the least of those (numbers) having the same ratio as
them. (Which is) the very thing it was required to show.
bþ. Proposition 2
Αριθμοὺς εὑρεῖν ἑξῆς ἀνάλογον ἐλαχίστους, ὅσους ἂν To find the least numbers, as many as may be preἐπιτάξῃ τις, ἐν τῷ δοθέντι λόγῳ. scribed, (which are) continuously proportional in a given
῎Εστω ὁ δοθεὶς λόγος ἐν ἐλάχίστοις ἀριθμοῖς ὁ τοῦ ratio.
Α πρὸς τὸν Β· δεῖ δὴ ἀριθμοὺς εὑρεῖν ἑξῆς ἀνάλογον Let the given ratio, (expressed) in the least numbers,
ἐλαχίστους, ὅσους ἄν τις ἐπιτάξῃ, ἐν τῷ τοῦ Α πρὸς τὸν Β be that of A to B. So it is required to find the least numλόγῳ. bers, as many as may be prescribed, (which are) in the
᾿Επιτετάχθωσαν δὴ τέσσαρες, καὶ ὁ Α ἑαυτὸν πολλα- ratio of A to B.
πλασιάσας τὸν Γ ποιείτω, τὸν δὲ Β πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Δ Let four (numbers) have been prescribed. And let A
ποιείτω, καὶ ἔτι ὁ Β ἑαυτὸν πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Ε ποιείτω, make C (by) multiplying itself, and let it make D (by)
καὶ ἔτι ὁ Α τοὺς Γ, Δ, Ε πολλαπλασιάσας τοὺς Ζ, Η, Θ multiplying B. And, further, let B make E (by) multiplyποιείτω, ὁ δὲ Β τὸν Ε πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Κ ποιείτω. ing itself. And, further, let A make F, G, H (by) multiplying C, D, E. And let B make K (by) multiplying
E.
228
STOIQEIWN hþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 8
Κ
Α
Β
Γ
∆
Ε
Ζ
Η
Θ
K
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
Καὶ ἐπεὶ ὁ Α ἑαυτὸν μὲν πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Γ And since A has made C (by) multiplying itself, and
πεποίηκεν, τὸν δὲ Β πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Δ πεποίηκεν, has made D (by) multiplying B, thus as A is to B, [so] C
ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν Β, [οὕτως] ὁ Γ πρὸς τὸν Δ. (is) to D [Prop. 7.17]. Again, since A has made D (by)
πάλιν, ἐπεὶ ὁ μὲν Α τὸν Β πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Δ πεποίηκεν, multiplying B, and B has made E (by) multiplying itself,
ὁ δὲ Β ἑαυτὸν πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Ε πεποίηκεν, ἑκάτερος A, B have thus made D, E, respectively, (by) multiplying
ἄρα τῶν Α, Β τὸν Β πολλαπλασιάσας ἑκάτερον τῶν Δ, Ε B. Thus, as A is to B, so D (is) to E [Prop. 7.18]. But, as
πεποίηκεν. ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν Β, οὕτως ὁ Δ πρὸς A (is) to B, (so) C (is) to D. And thus as C (is) to D, (so)
τὸν Ε. ἀλλ᾿ ὡς ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν Β, ὁ Γ πρὸς τὸν Δ· καὶ ὡς D (is) to E. And since A has made F, G (by) multiplying
ἄρα ὁ Γ πρὸς τὸν Δ, ὁ Δ πρὸς τὸν Ε. καὶ ἐπεὶ ὁ Α τοὺς Γ, C, D, thus as C is to D, [so] F (is) to G [Prop. 7.17].
Δ πολλαπλασιάσας τοὺς Ζ, Η πεποίηκεν, ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς ὁ Γ And as C (is) to D, so A was to B. And thus as A (is)
πρὸς τὸν Δ, [οὕτως] ὁ Ζ πρὸς τὸν Η. ὡς δὲ ὁ Γ πρὸς τὸν to B, (so) F (is) to G. Again, since A has made G, H
Δ, οὕτως ἦν ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν Β· καὶ ὡς ἄρα ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν Β, ὁ (by) multiplying D, E, thus as D is to E, (so) G (is) to
Ζ πρὸς τὸν Η. πάλιν, ἐπεὶ ὁ Α τοὺς Δ, Ε πολλαπλασιάσας H [Prop. 7.17]. But, as D (is) to E, (so) A (is) to B.
τοὺς Η, Θ πεποίηκεν, ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς ὁ Δ πρὸς τὸν Ε, ὁ Η And thus as A (is) to B, so G (is) to H. And since A, B
πρὸς τὸν Θ. ἀλλ᾿ ὡς ὁ Δ πρὸς τὸν Ε, ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν Β. καὶ have made H, K (by) multiplying E, thus as A is to B,
ὡς ἄρα ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν Β, οὕτως ὁ Η πρὸς τὸν Θ. καὶ ἐπεὶ so H (is) to K. But, as A (is) to B, so F (is) to G, and
οἱ Α, Β τὸν Ε πολλαπλασιάσαντες τοὺς Θ, Κ πεποιήκασιν, G to H. And thus as F (is) to G, so G (is) to H, and H
ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν Β, οὕτως ὁ Θ πρὸς τὸν Κ. ἀλλ᾿ to K. Thus, C, D, E and F, G, H, K are (both continuὡς ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν Β, οὕτως ὅ τε Ζ πρὸς τὸν Η καὶ ὁ Η πρὸς ously) proportional in the ratio of A to B. So I say that
τὸν Θ. καὶ ὡς ἄρα ὁ Ζ πρὸς τὸν Η, οὕτως ὅ τε Η πρὸς (they are) also the least (sets of numbers continuously
τὸν Θ καὶ ὁ Θ πρὸς τὸν Κ· οἱ Γ, Δ, Ε ἄρα καὶ οἱ Ζ, Η, proportional in that ratio). For since A and B are the
Θ, Κ ἀνάλογόν εἰσιν ἐν τῷ τοῦ Α πρὸς τὸν Β λόγῳ. λέγω least of those (numbers) having the same ratio as them,
δή, ὅτι καὶ ἐλάχιστοι. ἐπεὶ γὰρ οἱ Α, Β ἐλάχιστοί εἰσι τῶν and the least of those (numbers) having the same ratio
τὸν αὐτὸν λόγον ἐχόντων αὐτοῖς, οἱ δὲ ἐλάχιστοι τῶν τὸν are prime to one another [Prop. 7.22], A and B are thus
αὐτὸν λόγον ἐχόντων πρῶτοι πρὸς ἀλλήλους εἰσίν, οἱ Α, Β prime to one another. And A, B have made C, E, respecἄρα πρῶτοι πρὸς ἀλλήλους εἰσίν. καὶ ἑκάτερος μὲν τῶν Α, tively, (by) multiplying themselves, and have made F, K
Β ἑαυτὸν πολλαπλασιάσας ἑκάτερον τῶν Γ, Ε πεποίηκεν, by multiplying C, E, respectively. Thus, C, E and F, K
ἑκάτερον δὲ τῶν Γ, Ε πολλαπλασιάσας ἑκάτερον τῶν Ζ, Κ are prime to one another [Prop. 7.27]. And if there are
πεποίηκεν· οἱ Γ, Ε ἄρα καὶ οἱ Ζ, Κ πρῶτοι πρὸς ἀλλήλους any multitude whatsoever of continuously proportional
εἰσίν. ἐὰν δὲ ὦσιν ὁποσοιοῦν ἀριθμοὶ ἑξῆς ἀνάλογον, οἱ numbers, and the outermost of them are prime to one
δὲ ἄκροι αὐτῶν πρῶτοι πρὸς ἀλλήλους ὦσιν, ἐλάχιστοί εἰσι another, then the (numbers) are the least of those (numτῶν τὸν αὐτὸν λόγον ἐχόντων αὐτοῖς. οἱ Γ, Δ, Ε ἄρα καὶ bers) having the same ratio as them [Prop. 8.1]. Thus, C,
οἱ Ζ, Η, Θ, Κ ἐλάχιστοί εἰσι τῶν τὸν αὐτὸν λόγον ἐχόντων D, E and F, G, H, K are the least of those (continuously
τοῖς Α, Β· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. proportional sets of numbers) having the same ratio as A
and B. (Which is) the very thing it was required to show.
229
STOIQEIWN hþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 8
Pìrisma. Corollary
᾿Εκ δὴ τούτου φανερόν, ὅτι ἐὰν τρεῖς ἀριθμοὶ ἑξῆς So it is clear, from this, that if three continuously proἀνάλογον ἐλάχιστοι ὦσι τῶν τὸν αὐτὸν λόγον ἐχόντων portional numbers are the least of those (numbers) havαὐτοῖς, οἱ ἄκρον αὐτῶν τετράγωνοί εἰσιν, ἐὰν δὲ τέσσαρες, ing the same ratio as them then the outermost of them
κύβοι. are square, and, if four (numbers), cube.
gþ. Proposition 3
᾿Εὰν ὦσιν ὁποσοιοῦν ἀριθμοὶ ἑξῆς ἀνάλογον ἐλάχιστ- If there are any multitude whatsoever of continuοι τῶν τὸν αὐτὸν λόγον ἐχόντων αὐτοῖς, οἱ ἄκροι αὐτῶν ously proportional numbers (which are) the least of those
πρῶτοι πρὸς ἀλλήλους εἰσίν. (numbers) having the same ratio as them then the outermost of them are prime to one another.
Κ
Α
Β
Γ
∆
Λ
Μ
Ν
Ξ
Ε
Ζ
Η
Θ
O
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
K
L
M
N
῎Εστωσαν ὁποσοιοῦν ἀριθμοὶ ἑξῆς ἀνάλογον ἐλάχιστοι Let A, B, C, D be any multitude whatsoever of conτῶν τὸν αὐτὸν λόγον ἐχόντων αὐτοῖς οἱ Α, Β, Γ, Δ· λέγω, tinuously proportional numbers (which are) the least of
ὅτι οἱ ἄκροι αὐτῶν οἱ Α, Δ πρῶτοι πρὸς ἀλλήλους εἰσίν. those (numbers) having the same ratio as them. I say
Εἰλήφθωσαν γὰρ δύο μὲν ἀριθμοὶ ἐλάχιστοι ἐν τῷ τῶν that the outermost of them, A and D, are prime to one
Α, Β, Γ, Δ λόγῳ οἱ Ε, Ζ, τρεῖς δὲ οἱ Η, Θ, Κ, καὶ ἑξῆς another.
ἑνὶ πλείους, ἕως τὸ λαμβανόμενον πλῆθος ἴσον γένηται τῷ For let the two least (numbers) E, F (which are)
πλήθει τῶν Α, Β, Γ, Δ. εἰλήφθωσαν καὶ ἔστωσαν οἱ Λ, Μ, in the same ratio as A, B, C, D have been taken
Ν, Ξ. [Prop. 7.33]. And the three (least numbers) G, H, K
Καὶ ἐπεὶ οἱ Ε, Ζ ἐλάχιστοί εἰσι τῶν τὸν αὐτὸν λόγον [Prop. 8.2]. And (so on), successively increasing by one,
ἐχόντων αὐτοῖς, πρῶτοι πρὸς ἀλλήλους εἰσίν. καὶ ἐπεὶ until the multitude of (numbers) taken is made equal to
ἑκάτερος τῶν Ε, Ζ ἑαυτὸν μὲν πολλαπλασιάσας ἑκάτερον the multitude of A, B, C, D. Let them have been taken,
τῶν Η, Κ πεποίηκεν, ἑκάτερον δὲ τῶν Η, Κ πολλα- and let them be L, M, N, O.
πλασιάσας ἑκάτερον τῶν Λ, Ξ πεποίηκεν, καὶ οἱ Η, Κ ἄρα And since E and F are the least of those (numbers)
καὶ οἱ Λ, Ξ πρῶτοι πρὸς ἀλλήλους εἰσίν. καὶ ἐπεὶ οἱ Α, Β, having the same ratio as them they are prime to one anΓ, Δ ἐλάχιστοί εἰσι τῶν τὸν αὐτὸν λόγον ἐχόντων αὐτοῖς, other [Prop. 7.22]. And since E, F have made G, K, reεἰσὶ δὲ καὶ οἱ Λ, Μ, Ν, Ξ ἐλάχιστοι ἐν τῷ αὐτῷ λόγῳ ὄντες spectively, (by) multiplying themselves [Prop. 8.2 corr.],
τοῖς Α, Β, Γ, Δ, καί ἐστιν ἴσον τὸ πλῆθος τῶν Α, Β, Γ, and have made L, O (by) multiplying G, K, respecΔ τῷ πλήθει τῶν Λ, Μ, Ν, Ξ, ἕκαστος ἄρα τῶν Α, Β, Γ, tively, G, K and L, O are thus also prime to one another
Δ ἑκάστῳ τῶν Λ, Μ, Ν, Ξ ἴσος ἐστίν· ἴσος ἄρα ἐστὶν ὁ [Prop. 7.27]. And since A, B, C, D are the least of those
μὲν Α τῷ Λ, ὁ δὲ Δ τῷ Ξ. καί εἰσιν οἱ Λ, Ξ πρῶτοι πρὸς (numbers) having the same ratio as them, and L, M, N,
ἀλλήλους. καὶ οἱ Α, Δ ἄρα πρῶτοι πρὸς ἀλλήλους εἰσίν· O are also the least (of those numbers having the same
ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. ratio as them), being in the same ratio as A, B, C, D, and
the multitude of A, B, C, D is equal to the multitude of
L, M, N, O, thus A, B, C, D are equal to L, M, N, O,
respectively. Thus, A is equal to L, and D to O. And L
and O are prime to one another. Thus, A and D are also
prime to one another. (Which is) the very thing it was
230
STOIQEIWN hþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 8
required to show.
dþ. Proposition 4
Λόγων δοθέντων ὁποσωνοῦν ἐν ἐλαχίστοις ἀριθμοῖς For any multitude whatsoever of given ratios, (exἀριθμοὺς εὑρεῖν ἑξῆς ἀνάλογον ἐλαχίστους ἐν τοῖς δοθεῖσι pressed) in the least numbers, to find the least numbers
λόγοις. continuously proportional in these given ratios.
Λ
Α
Γ
Ε
Ν
Ξ
Μ
Ο
Β
∆
Ζ
Θ
Η
Κ
L
A
C
E
B
D
F
N
O
M
P
H
G
K
῎Εστωσαν οἱ δοθέντες λόγοι ἐν ἐλαχίστοις ἀριθμοῖς ὅ Let the given ratios, (expressed) in the least numbers,
τε τοῦ Α πρὸς τὸν Β καὶ ὁ τοῦ Γ πρὸς τὸν Δ καὶ ἔτι ὁ be the (ratios) of A to B, and of C to D, and, further,
τοῦ Ε πρὸς τὸν Ζ· δεῖ δὴ ἀριθμοὺς εὑρεῖν ἑξῆς ἀνάλογον of E to F. So it is required to find the least numbers
ἐλαχίστους ἔν τε τῷ τοῦ Α πρὸς τὸν Β λόγῳ καὶ ἐν τῷ τοῦ continuously proportional in the ratio of A to B, and of
Γ πρὸς τὸν Δ καὶ ἔτι τῷ τοῦ Ε πρὸς τὸν Ζ. C to B, and, further, of E to F.
Εἰλήφθω γὰρ ὁ ὑπὸ τῶν Β, Γ ἐλάχιστος μετρούμενος For let the least number, G, measured by (both) B and
ἀριθμὸς ὁ Η. καὶ ὁσάκις μὲν ὁ Β τὸν Η μετρεῖ, τοσαυτάκις C have be taken [Prop. 7.34]. And as many times as B
καὶ ὁ Α τὸν Θ μετρείτω, ὁσάκις δὲ ὁ Γ τὸν Η μετρεῖ, το- measures G, so many times let A also measure H. And as
σαυτάκις καὶ ὁ Δ τὸν Κ μετρείτω. ὁ δὲ Ε τὸν Κ ἤτοι μετρεῖ many times as C measures G, so many times let D also
ἢ οὐ μετρεῖ. μετρείτω πρότερον. καὶ ὁσάκις ὁ Ε τὸν Κ με- measure K. And E either measures, or does not measure,
τρεῖ, τοσαυτάκις καὶ ὁ Ζ τὸν Λ μετρείτω. καὶ ἐπεὶ ἰσάκις ὁ K. Let it, first of all, measure (K). And as many times as
Α τὸν Θ μετρεῖ καὶ ὁ Β τὸν Η, ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν E measures K, so many times let F also measure L. And
Β, οὕτως ὁ Θ πρὸς τὸν Η. διὰ τὰ αὐτὰ δὴ καὶ ὡς ὁ Γ πρὸς since A measures H the same number of times that B also
τὸν Δ, οὕτως ὁ Η πρὸς τὸν Κ, καὶ ἔτι ὡς ὁ Ε πρὸς τὸν Ζ, (measures) G, thus as A is to B, so H (is) to G [Def. 7.20,
οὕτως ὁ Κ πρὸς τὸν Λ· οἱ Θ, Η, Κ, Λ ἄρα ἑξῆς ἀνάλογόν Prop. 7.13]. And so, for the same (reasons), as C (is) to
εἰσιν ἔν τε τῷ τοῦ Α πρὸς τὸν Β καὶ ἐν τῷ τοῦ Γ πρὸς τὸν D, so G (is) to K, and, further, as E (is) to F, so K (is)
Δ καὶ ἔτι ἐν τῷ τοῦ Ε πρὸς τὸν Ζ λόγῳ. λέγω δή, ὅτι καὶ to L. Thus, H, G, K, L are continuously proportional in
ἐλάχιστοι. εἰ γὰρ μή εἰσιν οἱ Θ, Η, Κ, Λ ἑξῆς ἀνάλογον the ratio of A to B, and of C to D, and, further, of E to
ἐλάχιστοι ἔν τε τοῖς τοῦ Α πρὸς τὸν Β καὶ τοῦ Γ πρὸς τὸν F. So I say that (they are) also the least (numbers conΔ καὶ ἐν τῷ τοῦ Ε πρὸς τὸν Ζ λόγοις, ἔστωσαν οἱ Ν, Ξ, tinuously proportional in these ratios). For if H, G, K,
Μ, Ο. καὶ ἐπεί ἐστιν ὡς ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν Β, οὕτως ὁ Ν πρὸς L are not the least numbers continuously proportional in
τὸν Ξ, οἱ δὲ Α, Β ἐλάχιστοι, οἱ δὲ ἐλάχιστοι μετροῦσι τοὺς the ratios of A to B, and of C to D, and of E to F, let N,
τὸν αὐτὸν λόγον ἔχοντας ἰσάκις ὅ τε μείζων τὸν μείζονα O, M, P be (the least such numbers). And since as A is
καὶ ὁ ἐλάσσων τὸν ἐλάσσονα, τουτέστιν ὅ τε ἡγούμενος to B, so N (is) to O, and A and B are the least (numbers
τὸν ἡγούμενον καὶ ὁ ἑπόμενος τὸν ἑπόμενον, ὁ Β ἄρα τὸν which have the same ratio as them), and the least (numΞ μετρεῖ. διὰ τὰ αὐτὰ δὴ καὶ ὁ Γ τὸν Ξ μετρεῖ· οἱ Β, Γ bers) measure those (numbers) having the same ratio (as
ἄρα τὸν Ξ μετροῦσιν· καὶ ὁ ἐλάχιστος ἄρα ὑπὸ τῶν Β, Γ them) an equal number of times, the greater (measurμετρούμενος τὸν Ξ μετρήσει. ἐλάχιστος δὲ ὑπὸ τῶν Β, Γ ing) the greater, and the lesser the lesser—that is to say,
μετρεῖται ὁ Η· ὁ Η ἄρα τὸν Ξ μετρεῖ ὁ μείζων τὸν ἐλάσσονα· the leading (measuring) the leading, and the following
ὅπερ ἐστὶν ἀδύντατον. οὐκ ἄρα ἔσονταί τινες τῶν Θ, Η, Κ, the following [Prop. 7.20], B thus measures O. So, for
Λ ἐλάσσονες ἀριθμοὶ ἑξῆς ἔν τε τῷ τοῦ Α πρὸς τὸν Β καὶ the same (reasons), C also measures O. Thus, B and C
τῷ τοῦ Γ πρὸς τὸν Δ καὶ ἔτι τῷ τοῦ Ε πρὸς τὸν Ζ λόγῷ. (both) measure O. Thus, the least number measured by
(both) B and C will also measure O [Prop. 7.35]. And
G (is) the least number measured by (both) B and C.
231
STOIQEIWN hþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 8
Thus, G measures O, the greater (measuring) the lesser.
The very thing is impossible. Thus, there cannot be any
numbers less than H, G, K, L (which are) continuously
(proportional) in the ratio of A to B, and of C to D, and,
further, of E to F.
Τ
Μ
Ξ
Ν
Ο
Ε
Γ
Α Β
∆
Ζ
Θ
Η
Κ
Π
Ρ
Σ
T
A
C
E
B
D
H
G
K
N
O
M
P
F
Q
R
S
Μὴ μετρείτω δὴ ὁ Ε τὸν Κ, καὶ εἰλήφθω ὑπὸ τῶν Ε, So let E not measure K. And let the least numΚ ἐλάχιστος μετρούμενος ἀριθμὸς ὁ Μ. καὶ ὁσάκις μὲν ber, M, measured by (both) E and K have been taken
ὁ Κ τὸν Μ μετρεῖ, τοσαυτάκις καὶ ἑκάτερος τῶν Θ, Η [Prop. 7.34]. And as many times as K measures M, so
ἑκάτερον τῶν Ν, Ξ μετρείτω, ὁσάακις δὲ ὁ Ε τὸν Μ με- many times let H, G also measure N, O, respectively.
τρεῖ, τοσαυτάκις καὶ ὁ Ζ τὸν Ο μετρείτω. ἐπεὶ ἰσάκις ὁ Θ And as many times as E measures M, so many times let
τὸν Ν μετρεῖ καὶ ὁ Η τὸν Ξ, ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς ὁ Θ πρὸς τὸν F also measure P. Since H measures N the same numΗ, οὕτως ὁ Ν πρὸς τὸν Ξ. ὡς δὲ ὁ Θ πρὸς τὸν Η, οὕτως ber of times as G (measures) O, thus as H is to G, so
ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν Β· καὶ ὡς ἄρα ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν Β, οὕτως ὁ Ν N (is) to O [Def. 7.20, Prop. 7.13]. And as H (is) to G,
πρὸς τὸν Ξ. διὰ τὰ αὐτὰ δὴ καὶ ὡς ὁ Γ πρὸς τὸν Δ, οὕτως so A (is) to B. And thus as A (is) to B, so N (is) to
ὁ Ξ πρὸς τὸν Μ. πάλιν, ἐπεὶ ἰσάκις ὁ Ε τὸν Μ μετρεῖ καὶ O. And so, for the same (reasons), as C (is) to D, so O
ὁ Ζ τὸν Ο, ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς ὁ Ε πρὸς τὸν Ζ, οὕτως ὁ Μ πρὸς (is) to M. Again, since E measures M the same numτὸν Ο· οἱ Ν, Ξ, Μ, Ο ἄρα ἑξῆς ἀνάλογόν εἰσιν ἐν τοῖς τοῦ ber of times as F (measures) P, thus as E is to F, so
τε Α πρὸς τὸν Β καὶ τοῦ Γ πρὸς τὸν Δ καὶ ἔτι τοῦ Ε πρὸς M (is) to P [Def. 7.20, Prop. 7.13]. Thus, N, O, M, P
τὸν Ζ λόγοις. λέγω δή, ὅτι καὶ ἐλάχιστοι ἐν τοῖς Α Β, Γ are continuously proportional in the ratios of A to B, and
Δ, Ε Ζ λόγοις. εἰ γὰρ μή, ἔσονταί τινες τῶν Ν, Ξ, Μ, Ο of C to D, and, further, of E to F. So I say that (they
ἐλάσσονες ἀριθμοὶ ἑξῆς ἀνάλογον ἐν τοῖς Α Β, Γ Δ, Ε Ζ are) also the least (numbers) in the ratios of A B, C D,
λόγοις. ἔστωσαν οἱ Π, Ρ, Σ, Τ. καὶ ἐπεί ἐστιν ὡς ὁ Π πρὸς E F. For if not, then there will be some numbers less
τὸν Ρ, οὕτως ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν Β, οἱ δὲ Α, Β ἐλάχιστοι, οἱ δὲ than N, O, M, P (which are) continuously proportional
ἐλάχιστοι μετροῦσι τοὺς τὸν αὐτὸν λόγον ἔχοντας αὐτοῖς in the ratios of A B, C D, E F. Let them be Q, R, S,
ἰσάκις ὅ τε ἡγούμενος τὸν ἡγούμενον καὶ ὁ ἑπόμενος τὸν T . And since as Q is to R, so A (is) to B, and A and B
ἑπόμενον, ὁ Β ἄρα τὸν Ρ μετρεῖ. διὰ τὰ αὐτὰ δὴ καὶ ὁ Γ (are) the least (numbers having the same ratio as them),
τὸν Ρ μετρεῖ· οἱ Β, Γ ἄρα τὸν Ρ μετροῦσιν. καὶ ὁ ἐλάχιστος and the least (numbers) measure those (numbers) havἄρα ὑπὸ τῶν Β, Γ μετούμενος τὸν Ρ μετρήσει. ἐλάχιστος ing the same ratio as them an equal number of times,
δὲ ὑπὸ τῶν Β, Γ μετρούμενος ἐστιν ὁ Η· ὁ Η ἄρα τὸν Ρ the leading (measuring) the leading, and the following
μετρεῖ. καί ἐστιν ὡς ὁ Η πρὸς τὸν Ρ, οὕτως ὁ Κ πρὸς τὸν the following [Prop. 7.20], B thus measures R. So, for
Σ· καὶ ὁ Κ ἄρα τὸν Σ μετρεῖ. μετρεῖ δὲ καὶ ὁ Ε τὸν Σ· οἱ Ε, the same (reasons), C also measures R. Thus, B and C
Κ ἄρα τὸν Σ μετροῦσιν. καὶ ὁ ἐλάχιστος ἄρα ὑπὸ τῶν Ε, Κ (both) measure R. Thus, the least (number) measured by
μετρούμενος τὸν Σ μετρήσει. ἐλάχιστος δὲ ὑπὸ τῶν Ε, Κ (both) B and C will also measure R [Prop. 7.35]. And G
μετρούμενός ἐστιν ὁ Μ· ὁ Μ ἄρα τὸν Σ μετρεῖ ὁ μείζων τὸν is the least number measured by (both) B and C. Thus,
ἐλάσσονα· ὅπερ ἐστὶν ἀδύνατον. οὐκ ἄρα ἔσονταί τινες τῶν G measures R. And as G is to R, so K (is) to S. Thus,
232
STOIQEIWN hþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 8
Ν, Ξ, Μ, Ο ἐλάσσονες ἀριθμοὶ ἑξῆς ἀνάλογον ἔν τε τοῖς K also measures S [Def. 7.20]. And E also measures
τοῦ Α πρὸς τὸν Β καὶ τοῦ Γ πρὸς τὸν Δ καὶ ἔτι τοῦ Ε πρὸς S [Prop. 7.20]. Thus, E and K (both) measure S. Thus,
τὸν Ζ λόγοις· οἱ Ν, Ξ, Μ, Ο ἄρα ἑξῆς ἀνάλογον ἐλάχιστοί the least (number) measured by (both) E and K will also
εἰσιν ἐν τοῖς Α Β, Γ Δ, Ε Ζ λόγοις· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. measure S [Prop. 7.35]. And M is the least (number)
measured by (both) E and K. Thus, M measures S, the
greater (measuring) the lesser. The very thing is impossible. Thus there cannot be any numbers less than N, O,
M, P (which are) continuously proportional in the ratios
of A to B, and of C to D, and, further, of E to F. Thus,
N, O, M, P are the least (numbers) continuously proportional in the ratios of A B, C D, E F. (Which is) the very
thing it was required to show.
eþ. Proposition 5
Οἱ ἐπίπεδοι ἀριθμοὶ πρὸς ἀλλήλους λόγον ἔχουσι τὸν Plane numbers have to one another the ratio compounσυγκείμενον ἐκ τῶν πλευρῶν. ded† out of (the ratios of) their sides.
Λ
Α
Β
Γ
Ε
∆
Ζ
Η
Θ
Κ
L
A
B
C
E
D
F
G
H
K
῎Εστωσαν ἐπίπεδοι ἀριθμοὶ οἱ Α, Β, καὶ τοῦ μὲν Α Let A and B be plane numbers, and let the numbers
πλευραὶ ἔστωσαν οἱ Γ, Δ ἀριθμοί, τοῦ δὲ Β οἱ Ε, Ζ· λέγω, C, D be the sides of A, and (the numbers) E, F (the
ὅτι ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν Β λόγον ἔχει τὸν συγκείμενον ἐκ τῶν sides) of B. I say that A has to B the ratio compounded
πλευρῶν. out of (the ratios of) their sides.
Λόγων γὰρ δοθέντων τοῦ τε ὃν ἔχει ὁ Γ πρὸς τὸν Ε καὶ For given the ratios which C has to E, and D (has) to
ὁ Δ πρὸς τὸν Ζ εἰλήφθωσαν ἀριθμοὶ ἑξῆς ἐλάχιστοι ἐν τοῖς F, let the least numbers, G, H, K, continuously proporΓ Ε, Δ Ζ λόγοις, οἱ Η, Θ, Κ, ὥστε εἶναι ὡς μὲν τὸν Γ πρὸς tional in the ratios C E, D F have been taken [Prop. 8.4],
τὸν Ε, οὕτως τὸν Η πρὸς τὸν Θ, ὡς δὲ τὸν Δ πρὸς τὸν Ζ, so that as C is to E, so G (is) to H, and as D (is) to F, so
οὕτως τὸν Θ πρὸς τὸν Κ. καὶ ὁ Δ τὸν Ε πολλαπλασιάσας H (is) to K. And let D make L (by) multiplying E.
τὸν Λ ποιείτω. And since D has made A (by) multiplying C, and has
Καὶ ἐπεὶ ὁ Δ τὸν μὲν Γ πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Α made L (by) multiplying E, thus as C is to E, so A (is) to
πεποίηκεν, τὸν δὲ Ε πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Λ πεποίηκεν, L [Prop. 7.17]. And as C (is) to E, so G (is) to H. And
ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς ὁ Γ πρὸς τὸν Ε, οὕτως ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν Λ. ὡς thus as G (is) to H, so A (is) to L. Again, since E has
δὲ ὁ Γ πρὸς τὸν Ε, οὕτως ὁ Η πρὸς τὸν Θ· καὶ ὡς ἄρα ὁ made L (by) multiplying D [Prop. 7.16], but, in fact, has
Η πρὸς τὸν Θ, οὕτως ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν Λ. πάλιν, ἐπεὶ ὁ Ε τὸν also made B (by) multiplying F, thus as D is to F, so L
Δ πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Λ πεποίηκεν, ἀλλὰ μὴν καὶ τὸν Ζ (is) to B [Prop. 7.17]. But, as D (is) to F, so H (is) to
πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Β πεποίηκεν, ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς ὁ Δ πρὸς K. And thus as H (is) to K, so L (is) to B. And it was
τὸν Ζ, οὕτως ὁ Λ πρὸς τὸν Β. ἀλλ᾿ ὡς ὁ Δ πρὸς τὸν Ζ, also shown that as G (is) to H, so A (is) to L. Thus, via
οὕτως ὁ Θ πρὸς τὸν Κ· καὶ ὡς ἄρα ὁ Θ πρὸς τὸν Κ, οὕτως equality, as G is to K, [so] A (is) to B [Prop. 7.14]. And
ὁ Λ πρὸς τὸν Β. ἐδείχθη δὲ καὶ ὡς ὁ Η πρὸς τὸν Θ, οὕτως G has to K the ratio compounded out of (the ratios of)
ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν Λ· δι᾿ ἴσου ἄρα ἐστὶν ὡς ὁ Η πρὸς τὸν Κ, the sides (of A and B). Thus, A also has to B the ratio
[οὕτως] ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν Β. ὁ δὲ Η πρὸς τὸν Κ λόγον ἔχει compounded out of (the ratios of) the sides (of A and B).
233
STOIQEIWN hþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 8
τὸν συγκείμενον ἐκ τῶν πλευρῶν· καὶ ὁ Α ἄρα πρὸς τὸν (Which is) the very thing it was required to show.
Β λόγον ἔχει τὸν συγκείμενον ἐκ τῶν πλευρῶν· ὅπερ ἔδει
δεῖξαι.
†
i.e., multiplied.
þ. Proposition 6
᾿Εὰν ὦσιν ὁποσοιοῦν ἀριθμοὶ ἑξῆς ἀνάλογον, ὁ δὲ If there are any multitude whatsoever of continuously
πρῶτος τὸν δεύτερον μὴ μετρῇ, οὐδὲ ἄλλος οὐδεὶς οὐδένα proportional numbers, and the first does not measure the
μετρήσει. second, then no other (number) will measure any other
(number) either.
Θ
Α
Β
Γ
∆
Ε
Ζ
Η
E
F
G
H
A
B
C
D
῎Εστωσαν ὁποσοιοῦν ἀριθμοὶ ἑξῆς ἀνάλογον οἱ Α, Β, Let A, B, C, D, E be any multitude whatsoever of
Γ, Δ, Ε, ὁ δὲ Α τὸν Β μὴ μετρείτω· λέγω, ὅτι οὐδὲ ἄλλος continuously proportional numbers, and let A not meaοὐδεὶς οὐδένα μετρήσει. sure B. I say that no other (number) will measure any
῞Οτι μὲν οὖν οἱ Α, Β, Γ, Δ, Ε ἑξῆς ἀλλήλους οὐ με- other (number) either.
τροῦσιν, φανερόν· οὐδὲ γὰρ ὁ Α τὸν Β μετρεῖ. λέγω Now, (it is) clear that A, B, C, D, E do not succesδή, ὅτι οὐδὲ ἄλλος οὐδεὶς οὐδένα μετρήσει. εἰ γὰρ δυ- sively measure one another. For A does not even meaνατόν, μετρείτω ὁ Α τὸν Γ. καὶ ὅσοι εἰσὶν οἱ Α, Β, Γ, sure B. So I say that no other (number) will measure
τοσοῦτοι εἰλήφθωσαν ἐλάχιστοι ἀριθμοὶ τῶν τὸν αὐτὸν any other (number) either. For, if possible, let A measure
λόγον ἐχόντων τοῖς Α, Β, Γ οἱ Ζ, Η, Θ. καὶ ἐπεὶ οἱ Ζ, C. And as many (numbers) as are A, B, C, let so many
Η, Θ ἐν τῷ αὐτῷ λόγῳ εἰσὶ τοῖς Α, Β, Γ, καί ἐστιν ἴσον τὸ of the least numbers, F, G, H, have been taken of those
πλῆθος τῶν Α, Β, Γ τῷ πλήθει τῶν Ζ, Η, Θ, δι᾿ ἴσου ἄρα (numbers) having the same ratio as A, B, C [Prop. 7.33].
ἐστὶν ὡς ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν Γ, οὕτως ὁ Ζ πρὸς τὸν Θ. καὶ ἐπεί And since F, G, H are in the same ratio as A, B, C, and
ἐστιν ὡς ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν Β, οὕτως ὁ Ζ πρὸς τὸν Η, οὐ μετρεῖ the multitude of A, B, C is equal to the multitude of F,
δὲ ὁ Α τὸν Β, οὐ μετρεῖ ἄρα οὐδὲ ὁ Ζ τὸν Η· οὐκ ἄρα μονάς G, H, thus, via equality, as A is to C, so F (is) to H
ἐστιν ὁ Ζ· ἡ γὰρ μονὰς πάντα ἀριθμὸν μετρεῖ. καί εἰσιν οἱ [Prop. 7.14]. And since as A is to B, so F (is) to G,
Ζ, Θ πρῶτοι πρὸς ἀλλήλους [οὐδὲ ὁ Ζ ἄρα τὸν Θ μετρεῖ]. and A does not measure B, F does not measure G either
καί ἐστιν ὡς ὁ Ζ πρὸς τὸν Θ, οὕτως ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν Γ· οὐδὲ [Def. 7.20]. Thus, F is not a unit. For a unit measures
ὁ Α ἄρα τὸν Γ μετρεῖ. ὁμοίως δὴ δείξομεν, ὅτι οὐδὲ ἄλλος all numbers. And F and H are prime to one another
οὐδεὶς οὐδένα μετρήσει· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. [Prop. 8.3] [and thus F does not measure H]. And as
F is to H, so A (is) to C. And thus A does not measure
C either [Def. 7.20]. So, similarly, we can show that no
other (number) can measure any other (number) either.
(Which is) the very thing it was required to show.
zþ. Proposition 7
᾿Εὰν ὦσιν ὁποσοιοῦν ἀριθμοὶ [ἑξῆς] ἀνάλογον, ὁ δὲ If there are any multitude whatsoever of [continuπρῶτος τὸν ἔσχατον μετρῇ, καὶ τὸν δεύτερον μετρήσει. ously] proportional numbers, and the first measures the
234
STOIQEIWN hþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 8
last, then (the first) will also measure the second.
Α
Β
Γ
∆ D
A
B
C
῎Εστωσαν ὁποσοιοῦν ἀριθμοὶ ἑξῆς ἀνάλογον οἱ Α, Β, Γ, Let A, B, C, D be any number whatsoever of continuΔ, ὁ δὲ Α τὸν Δ μετρείτω· λέγω, ὅτι καὶ ὁ Α τὸν Β μετρεῖ. ously proportional numbers. And let A measure D. I say
Εἰ γὰρ οὐ μετρεῖ ὁ Α τὸν Β, οὐδὲ ἄλλος οὐδεὶς οὐδένα that A also measures B.
μετρήσει· μετρεῖ δὲ ὁ Α τὸν Δ. μετρεῖ ἄρα καὶ ὁ Α τὸν Β· For if A does not measure B then no other (number)
ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. will measure any other (number) either [Prop. 8.6]. But
A measures D. Thus, A also measures B. (Which is) the
very thing it was required to show.
hþ. Proposition 8
᾿Εὰν δύο ἀριθμῶν μεταξὺ κατὰ τὸ συνεχὲς ἀνάλογον If between two numbers there fall (some) numbers in
ἐμπίπτωσιν ἀριθμοί, ὅσοι εἰς αὐτοὺς μεταξὺ κατὰ τὸ συ- continued proportion then, as many numbers as fall in
νεχὲς ἀνόλογον ἐμπίπτουσιν ἀριθμοί, τοσοῦτοι καὶ εἰς τοὺς between them in continued proportion, so many (numτὸν αὐτὸν λόγον ἔχοντας [αὐτοῖς] μεταξὺ κατὰ τὸ συνὲχες bers) will also fall in between (any two numbers) having
ἀνάλογον ἐμπεσοῦνται the same ratio [as them] in continued proportion.
Α Ε
Γ
∆
Β
Η
Θ
Κ
Λ
Ζ
Ν
Μ
F
G
K
L
H
A
C
D
B
E
M
N
Δύο γὰρ ἀριθμῶν τῶν Α, Β μεταξὺ κατὰ τὸ συνεχὲς For let the numbers, C and D, fall between two numἀνάλογον ἐμπιπτέτωσαν ἀριθμοὶ οἱ Γ, Δ, καὶ πεποιήσθω ὡς bers, A and B, in continued proportion, and let it have
ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν Β, οὕτως ὁ Ε πρὸς τὸν Ζ· λέγω, ὅτι ὅσοι εἰς been contrived (that) as A (is) to B, so E (is) to F. I say
τοὺς Α, Β μεταξὺ κατὰ τὸ συνεχὲς ἀνάλογον ἐμπεπτώκασιν that, as many numbers as have fallen in between A and
ἀριθμοί, τοσοῦτοι καὶ εἰς τοὺς Ε, Ζ μεταξὺ κατὰ τὸ συνεχὲς B in continued proportion, so many (numbers) will also
ἀνάλογον ἐμπεσοῦνται. fall in between E and F in continued proportion.
῞Οσοι γάρ εἰσι τῷ πλήθει οἱ Α, Β, Γ, Δ, τοσοῦτοι For as many as A, B, C, D are in multitude, let so
εἰλήφθωσαν ἐλάχιστοι ἀριθμοὶ τῶν τὸν αὐτὸν λόγον many of the least numbers, G, H, K, L, having the same
ἐχόντων τοῖς Α, Γ, Δ, Β οἱ Η, Θ, Κ, Λ· οἱ ἄρα ἄκροι ratio as A, B, C, D, have been taken [Prop. 7.33]. Thus,
αὐτῶν οἱ Η, Λ πρῶτοι πρὸς ἀλλήλους εἰσίν. καὶ ἐπεὶ οἱ Α, the outermost of them, G and L, are prime to one another
Γ, Δ, Β τοῖς Η, Θ, Κ, Λ ἐν τῷ αὐτῷ λόγῳ εἰσίν, καί ἐστιν [Prop. 8.3]. And since A, B, C, D are in the same ratio
ἴσον τὸ πλῆθος τῶν Α, Γ, Δ, Β τῷ πλήθει τῶν Η, Θ, Κ, as G, H, K, L, and the multitude of A, B, C, D is equal
Λ, δι᾿ ἴσου ἄρα ἐστὶν ὡς ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν Β, οὕτως ὁ Η πρὸς to the multitude of G, H, K, L, thus, via equality, as A is
τὸν Λ. ὡς δὲ ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν Β, οὕτως ὁ Ε πρὸς τὸν Ζ· καὶ to B, so G (is) to L [Prop. 7.14]. And as A (is) to B, so
235
STOIQEIWN hþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 8
ὡς ἄρα ὁ Η πρὸς τὸν Λ, οὕτως ὁ Ε πρὸς τὸν Ζ. οἱ δὲ Η, Λ E (is) to F. And thus as G (is) to L, so E (is) to F. And
πρῶτοι, οἱ δὲ πρῶτοι καὶ ἐλάχιστοι, οἱ δὲ ἐλάχιστοι ἀριθμοὶ G and L (are) prime (to one another). And (numbers)
μετροῦσι τοὺς τὸν αὐτὸν λόγον ἔχοντας ἰσάκις ὅ τε μείζων prime (to one another are) also the least (numbers havτὸν μείζονα καὶ ὁ ἐλάσσων τὸν ἐλάσσονα, τουτέστιν ὅ τε ing the same ratio as them) [Prop. 7.21]. And the least
ἡγούμενος τὸν ἡγούμενον καὶ ὁ ἑπόμενος τὸν ἑπόμενον. numbers measure those (numbers) having the same ratio
ἰσάκις ἄρα ὁ Η τὸν Ε μετρεῖ καὶ ὁ Λ τὸν Ζ. ὁσάκις δὴ ὁ Η (as them) an equal number of times, the greater (measurτὸν Ε μετρεῖ, τοσαυτάκις καὶ ἑκάτερος τῶν Θ, Κ ἑκάτερον ing) the greater, and the lesser the lesser—that is to say,
τῶν Μ, Ν μετρείτω· οἱ Η, Θ, Κ, Λ ἄρα τοὺς Ε, Μ, Ν, Ζ the leading (measuring) the leading, and the following
ἰσάκις μετροῦσιν. οἱ Η, Θ, Κ, Λ ἄρα τοῖς Ε, Μ, Ν, Ζ ἐν τῷ the following [Prop. 7.20]. Thus, G measures E the same
αὐτῷ λόγῳ εἰσίν. ἀλλὰ οἱ Η, Θ, Κ, Λ τοῖς Α, Γ, Δ, Β ἐν τῷ number of times as L (measures) F. So as many times as
αὐτῷ λόγῳ εἰσίν· καὶ οἱ Α, Γ, Δ, Β ἄρα τοῖς Ε, Μ, Ν, Ζ ἐν G measures E, so many times let H, K also measure M,
τῷ αὐτῷ λόγῳ εἰσίν. οἱ δὲ Α, Γ, Δ, Β ἑξῆς ἀνάλογόν εἰσιν· N, respectively. Thus, G, H, K, L measure E, M, N,
καὶ οἱ Ε, Μ, Ν, Ζ ἄρα ἑξῆς ἀνάλογόν εἰσιν. ὅσοι ἄρα εἰς F (respectively) an equal number of times. Thus, G, H,
τοὺς Α, Β μεταξὺ κατὰ τὸ συνεχὲς ἀνάλογον ἐμπεπτώκασιν K, L are in the same ratio as E, M, N, F [Def. 7.20].
ἀριθμοί, τοσοῦτοι καὶ εἰς τοὺς Ε, Ζ μεταξὺ κατὰ τὸ συνεχὲς But, G, H, K, L are in the same ratio as A, C, D, B.
ἀνάλογον ἐμπεπτώκασιν ἀριθμοί· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. Thus, A, C, D, B are also in the same ratio as E, M, N,
F. And A, C, D, B are continuously proportional. Thus,
E, M, N, F are also continuously proportional. Thus,
as many numbers as have fallen in between A and B in
continued proportion, so many numbers have also fallen
in between E and F in continued proportion. (Which is)
the very thing it was required to show.
jþ. Proposition 9
᾿Εὰν δύο ἀριθμοὶ πρῶτοι πρὸς ἀλλήλους ὦσιν, καὶ If two numbers are prime to one another and there
εἰς αὐτοὺς μεταξὺ κατὰ τὸ συνεχὲς ἀνάλογον ἐμπίπτωσιν fall in between them (some) numbers in continued proἀριθμοί, ὅσοι εἰς αὐτοὺς μεταξὺ κατὰ τὸ συνεχὲς ἀνάλογον portion then, as many numbers as fall in between them
ἐμπίπτουσιν ἀριθμοί, τοσοῦτοι καὶ ἑκατέρου αὐτῶν καὶ in continued proportion, so many (numbers) will also fall
μονάδος μεταξὺ κατὰ τὸ συνεχὲς ἀνάλογον ἐμπεσοῦνται. between each of them and a unit in continued proportion.
Α Θ
Γ
∆
Β
Ε
Ζ
Η Ο
Ξ
Ν
Μ
Λ
Κ
G
A
C
D
B
H
K
L
M
N
O
P
E
F
῎Εστωσαν δύο ἀριθμοὶ πρῶτοι πρὸς ἀλλήλους οἱ Α, Let A and B be two numbers (which are) prime to
Β, καὶ εἰς αὐτοὺς μεταξὺ κατὰ τὸ συνεχὲς ἀνάλογον one another, and let the (numbers) C and D fall in beἐμπιπτέτωσαν οἱ Γ, Δ, καὶ ἐκκείσθω ἡ Ε μονάς· λέγω, tween them in continued proportion. And let the unit E
ὅτι ὅσοι εἰς τοὺς Α, Β μεταξὺ κατὰ τὸ συνεχὲς ἀνάλογον be set out. I say that, as many numbers as have fallen
ἐμπεπτώκασιν ἀριθμοί, τοσοῦτοι καὶ ἑκατέρου τῶν Α, in between A and B in continued proportion, so many
Β καὶ τῆς μονάδος μεταξὺ κατὰ τὸ συνεχὲς ἀνάλογον (numbers) will also fall between each of A and B and
ἐμπεσοῦνται. the unit in continued proportion.
Εἰλήφθωσαν γὰρ δύο μὲν ἀριθμοὶ ἐλάχιστοι ἐν τῷ τῶν For let the least two numbers, F and G, which are in
Α, Γ, Δ, Β λόγῳ ὄντες οἱ Ζ, Η, τρεῖς δὲ οἱ Θ, Κ, Λ, καὶ ἀεὶ the ratio of A, C, D, B, have been taken [Prop. 7.33].
236
STOIQEIWN hþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 8
ἑξῆς ἑνὶ πλείους, ἕως ἂν ἴσον γένηται τὸ πλῆθος αὐτῶν τῷ And the (least) three (numbers), H, K, L. And so on,
πλήθει τῶν Α, Γ, Δ, Β. εἰλήφθωσαν, καὶ ἔστωσαν οἱ Μ, Ν, successively increasing by one, until the multitude of the
Ξ, Ο. φανερὸν δή, ὅτι ὁ μὲν Ζ ἑαυτὸν πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν (least numbers taken) is made equal to the multitude of
Θ πεποίηκεν, τὸν δὲ Θ πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Μ πεποίηκεν, A, C, D, B [Prop. 8.2]. Let them have been taken, and
καὶ ὁ Η ἑαυτὸν μὲν πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Λ πεποίηκεν, τὸν let them be M, N, O, P. So (it is) clear that F has made
δὲ Λ πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Ο πεποίηκεν. καὶ ἐπεὶ οἱ Μ, Ν, H (by) multiplying itself, and has made M (by) multiΞ, Ο ἐλάχιστοί εἰσι τῶν τὸν αὐτὸν λόγον ἐχόντων τοῖς Ζ, plying H. And G has made L (by) multiplying itself, and
Η, εἰσὶ δὲ καὶ οἱ Α, Γ, Δ, Β ἐλάχιστοι τῶν τὸν αὐτὸν λόγον has made P (by) multiplying L [Prop. 8.2 corr.]. And
ἐχόντων τοῖς Ζ, Η, καί ἐστιν ἴσον τὸ πλῆθος τῶν Μ, Ν, Ξ, since M, N, O, P are the least of those (numbers) havΟ τῷ πλήθει τῶν Α, Γ, Δ, Β, ἕκαστος ἄρα τῶν Μ, Ν, Ξ, Ο ing the same ratio as F, G, and A, C, D, B are also the
ἑκάστῳ τῶν Α, Γ, Δ, Β ἴσος ἐστίν· ἴσος ἄρα ἐστὶν ὁ μὲν Μ least of those (numbers) having the same ratio as F, G
τῷ Α, ὁ δὲ Ο τῷ Β. καὶ ἐπεὶ ὁ Ζ ἑαυτὸν πολλαπλασιάσας [Prop. 8.2], and the multitude of M, N, O, P is equal
τὸν Θ πεποίηκεν, ὁ Ζ ἄρα τὸν Θ μετρεῖ κατὰ τὰς ἐν τῷ Ζ to the multitude of A, C, D, B, thus M, N, O, P are
μονάδας. μετρεῖ δὲ καὶ ἡ Ε μονὰς τὸν Ζ κατὰ τὰς ἐν αὐτῷ equal to A, C, D, B, respectively. Thus, M is equal to
μονάδας· ἰσάκις ἄρα ἡ Ε μονὰς τὸν Ζ ἀριθμὸν μετρεῖ καὶ ὁ Ζ A, and P to B. And since F has made H (by) multiplyτὸν Θ. ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς ἡ Ε μονὰς πρὸς τὸν Ζ ἀριθμόν, οὕτως ing itself, F thus measures H according to the units in F
ὁ Ζ πρὸς τὸν Θ. πάλιν, ἐπεὶ ὁ Ζ τὸν Θ πολλαπλασιάσας [Def. 7.15]. And the unit E also measures F according to
τὸν Μ πεποίηκεν, ὁ Θ ἄρα τὸν Μ μετρεῖ κατὰ τὰς ἐν τῷ Ζ the units in it. Thus, the unit E measures the number F
μονάδας. μετρεῖ δὲ καὶ ἡ Ε μονὰς τὸν Ζ ἀριθμὸν κατὰ τὰς ἐν as many times as F (measures) H. Thus, as the unit E is
αὐτῷ μονάδας· ἰσάκις ἄρα ἡ Ε μονὰς τὸν Ζ ἀριθμὸν μετρεῖ to the number F, so F (is) to H [Def. 7.20]. Again, since
καὶ ὁ Θ τὸν Μ. ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς ἡ Ε μονὰς πρὸς τὸν Ζ ἀριθμόν, F has made M (by) multiplying H, H thus measures M
οὕτως ὁ Θ πρὸς τὸν Μ. ἐδείχθη δὲ καὶ ὡς ἡ Ε μονὰς πρὸς according to the units in F [Def. 7.15]. And the unit E
τὸν Ζ ἀριθμόν, οὕτως ὁ Ζ πρὸς τὸν Θ· καὶ ὡς ἄρα ἡ Ε μονὰς also measures the number F according to the units in it.
πρὸς τὸν Ζ ἀριθμόν, οὕτως ὁ Ζ πρὸς τὸν Θ καὶ ὁ Θ πρὸς Thus, the unit E measures the number F as many times
τὸν Μ. ἴσος δὲ ὁ Μ τῷ Α· ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς ἡ Ε μονὰς πρὸς τὸν as H (measures) M. Thus, as the unit E is to the number
Ζ ἀριθμόν, οὕτως ὁ Ζ πρὸς τὸν Θ καὶ ὁ Θ πρὸς τὸν Α. διὰ F, so H (is) to M [Prop. 7.20]. And it was shown that as
τὰ αὐτὰ δὴ καὶ ὡς ἡ Ε μονὰς πρὸς τὸν Η ἀριθμόν, οὕτως ὁ the unit E (is) to the number F, so F (is) to H. And thus
Η πρὸς τὸν Λ καὶ ὁ Λ πρὸς τὸν Β. ὅσοι ἄρα εἰς τοὺς Α, Β as the unit E (is) to the number F, so F (is) to H, and H
μεταξὺ κατὰ τὸ συνεχὲς ἀνάλογον ἐμπεπτώκασιν ἀριθμοί, (is) to M. And M (is) equal to A. Thus, as the unit E is
τοσοῦτοι καὶ ἑκατέρου τῶν Α, Β καὶ μονάδος τῆς Ε μεταξὺ to the number F, so F (is) to H, and H to A. And so, for
κατὰ τὸ συνεχὲς ἀνάλογον ἐμπεπτώκασιν ἀριθμοί· ὅπερ ἔδει the same (reasons), as the unit E (is) to the number G,
δεῖξαι. so G (is) to L, and L to B. Thus, as many (numbers) as
have fallen in between A and B in continued proportion,
so many numbers have also fallen between each of A and
B and the unit E in continued proportion. (Which is) the
very thing it was required to show.
iþ. Proposition 10
᾿Εάν δύο ἀριθμῶν ἑκατέρου καὶ μονάδος μεταξὺ κατὰ If (some) numbers fall between each of two numbers
τὸ συνεχὲς ἀνάλογον ἐμπίπτωσιν ἀριθμοί, ὅσοι ἑκατέρου and a unit in continued proportion then, as many (numαὐτῶν καὶ μονάδος μεταξὺ κατὰ τὸ συνεχὲς ἀνάλογον bers) as fall between each of the (two numbers) and the
ἐμπίπτουσιν ἀριθμοί, τοσοῦτοι καὶ εἰς αὐτοὺς μεταξὺ κατὰ unit in continued proportion, so many (numbers) will
τὸ συνεχὲς ἀνάλογον ἐμπεσοῦνται. also fall in between the (two numbers) themselves in conΔύο γὰρ ἀριθμῶν τῶν Α, Β καὶ μονάδος τῆς Γ με- tinued proportion.
ταξύ κατὰ τὸ συνεχὲς ἀνάλογον ἐμπιπτέτωσαν ἀριθμοὶ οἵ For let the numbers D, E and F, G fall between the
τε Δ, Ε καὶ οἱ Ζ, Η· λέγω, ὅτι ὅσοι ἑκατέρου τῶν Α, numbers A and B (respectively) and the unit C in conΒ καὶ μονάδος τῆς Γ μεταξὺ κατὰ τὸ συνεχὲς ἀνάλογον tinued proportion. I say that, as many numbers as have
ἐμπεπτώκασιν ἀριθμοί, τοσοῦτοι καὶ εἰς τοὺς Α, Β μεταξὺ fallen between each of A and B and the unit C in continκατὰ τὸ συνεχὲς ἀνάλογον ἐμπεσοῦνται. ued proportion, so many will also fall in between A and
B in continued proportion.
237
STOIQEIWN hþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 8
Ε
Γ
∆
Α
Θ
Κ
Λ
Β
Η
Ζ
Γ
L
C C
D
E
A B
G
F
H
K
῾Ο Δ γὰρ τὸν Ζ πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Θ ποιείτω, For let D make H (by) multiplying F. And let D, F
ἑκάτερος δὲ τῶν Δ, Ζ τὸν Θ πολλαπλασιάσας ἑκάτερον make K, L, respectively, by multiplying H.
τῶν Κ, Λ ποιείτω. As since as the unit C is to the number D, so D (is) to
Καὶ ἐπεί ἐστιν ὡς ἡ Γ μονὰς πρὸς τὸν Δ ἀριθμόν, οὕτως E, the unit C thus measures the number D as many times
ὁ Δ πρὸς τὸν Ε, ἰσάκις ἄρα ἡ Γ μονὰς τὸν Δ ἀριθμὸν μετρεῖ as D (measures) E [Def. 7.20]. And the unit C measures
καὶ ὁ Δ τὸν Ε. ἡ δὲ Γ μονὰς τὸν Δ ἀριθμὸν μετρεῖ κατὰ τὰς the number D according to the units in D. Thus, the
ἐν τῷ Δ μονάδας· καὶ ὁ Δ ἄρα ἀριθμὸς τὸν Ε μετρεῖ κατὰ number D also measures E according to the units in D.
τὰς ἐν τῷ Δ μονάδας· ὁ Δ ἄρα ἑαυτὸν πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Thus, D has made E (by) multiplying itself. Again, since
Ε πεποίηκεν. πάλιν, ἐπεί ἐστιν ὡς ἡ Γ [μονὰς] πρὸς τὸν as the [unit] C is to the number D, so E (is) to A, the
Δ ἀριθμὸν, οὕτως ὁ Ε πρὸς τὸν Α, ἰσάκις ἄρα ἡ Γ μονὰς unit C thus measures the number D as many times as E
τὸν Δ ἀριθμὸν μετρεῖ καὶ ὁ Ε τὸν Α. ἡ δὲ Γ μονὰς τὸν (measures) A [Def. 7.20]. And the unit C measures the
Δ ἀριθμὸν μετρεῖ κατὰ τὰς ἐν τῷ Δ μονάδας· καὶ ὁ Ε ἄρα number D according to the units in D. Thus, E also meaτὸν Α μετρεῖ κατὰ τὰς ἐν τῷ Δ μονάδας· ὁ Δ ἄρα τὸν Ε sures A according to the units in D. Thus, D has made
πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Α πεποίηκεν. διὰ τὰ αὐτὰ δὴ καὶ ὁ A (by) multiplying E. And so, for the same (reasons), F
μὲν Ζ ἑαυτὸν πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Η πεποίηκεν, τὸν δὲ Η has made G (by) multiplying itself, and has made B (by)
πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Β πεποίηκεν. καὶ ἐπεὶ ὁ Δ ἑαυτὸν μὲν multiplying G. And since D has made E (by) multiplying
πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Ε πεποίηκεν, τὸν δὲ Ζ πολλαπλασιάσας itself, and has made H (by) multiplying F, thus as D is to
τὸν Θ πεποίηκεν, ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς ὁ Δ πρὸς τὸν Ζ, οὕτως ὁ Ε F, so E (is) to H [Prop 7.17]. And so, for the same reaπρὸς τὸν Θ. διὰ τὰ αὐτὰ δὴ καὶ ὡς ὁ Δ πρὸς τὸν Ζ, οὕτως ὁ sons, as D (is) to F, so H (is) to G [Prop. 7.18]. And thus
Θ πρὸς τὸν Η. καὶ ὡς ἄρα ὁ Ε πρὸς τὸν Θ, οὕτως ὁ Θ πρὸς as E (is) to H, so H (is) to G. Again, since D has made
τὸν Η. πάλιν, ἐπεὶ ὁ Δ ἑκάτερον τῶν Ε, Θ πολλαπλασιάσας A, K (by) multiplying E, H, respectively, thus as E is to
ἑκάτερον τῶν Α, Κ πεποίηκεν, ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς ὁ Ε πρὸς τὸν Θ, H, so A (is) to K [Prop 7.17]. But, as E (is) to H, so D
οὕτως ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν Κ. ἀλλ᾿ ὡς ὁ Ε πρὸς τὸν Θ, οὕτως ὁ Δ (is) to F. And thus as D (is) to F, so A (is) to K. Again,
πρὸς τὸν Ζ· καὶ ὡς ἄρα ὁ Δ πρὸς τὸν Ζ, οὕτως ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν since D, F have made K, L, respectively, (by) multiplyΚ. πάλιν, ἐπεὶ ἑκάτερος τῶν Δ, Ζ τὸν Θ πολλαπλασιάσας ing H, thus as D is to F, so K (is) to L [Prop. 7.18]. But,
ἑκάτερον τῶν Κ, Λ πεποίηκεν, ἕστιν ἄρα ὡς ὁ Δ πρὸς τὸν as D (is) to F, so A (is) to K. And thus as A (is) to K,
Ζ, οὕτως ὁ Κ πρὸς τὸν Λ. ἀλλ᾿ ὡς ὁ Δ πρὸς τὸν Ζ, οὕτως ὁ so K (is) to L. Further, since F has made L, B (by) mulΑ πρὸς τὸν Κ· καὶ ὡς ἄρα ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν Κ, οὕτως ὁ Κ πρὸς tiplying H, G, respectively, thus as H is to G, so L (is) to
τὸν Λ. ἔτι ἐπεὶ ὁ Ζ ἑκάτερον τῶν Θ, Η πολλαπλασιάσας B [Prop 7.17]. And as H (is) to G, so D (is) to F. And
ἑκάτερον τῶν Λ, Β πεποίηκεν, ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς ὁ Θ πρὸς τὸν thus as D (is) to F, so L (is) to B. And it was also shown
Η, οὕτως ὁ Λ πρὸς τὸν Β. ὡς δὲ ὁ Θ πρὸς τὸν Η, οὕτως that as D (is) to F, so A (is) to K, and K to L. And thus
ὁ Δ πρὸς τὸν Ζ· καὶ ὡς ἄρα ὁ Δ πρὸς τὸν Ζ, οὕτως ὁ Λ as A (is) to K, so K (is) to L, and L to B. Thus, A, K,
πρὸς τὸν Β. ἐδείχθη δὲ καὶ ὡς ὁ Δ πρὸς τὸν Ζ, οὕτως ὅ τε L, B are successively in continued proportion. Thus, as
Α πρὸς τὸν Κ καὶ ὁ Κ πρὸς τὸν Λ· καὶ ὡς ἄρα ὁ Α πρὸς many numbers as fall between each of A and B and the
τὸν Κ, οὕτως ὁ Κ πρὸς τὸν Λ καὶ ὁ Λ πρὸς τὸν Β. οἱ Α, unit C in continued proportion, so many will also fall in
Κ, Λ, Β ἄρα κατὰ τὸ συνεχὲς ἑξῆς εἰσιν ἀνάλογον. ὅσοι between A and B in continued proportion. (Which is)
ἄρα ἑκατέρου τῶν Α, Β καὶ τῆς Γ μονάδος μεταξὺ κατὰ the very thing it was required to show.
τὸ συνεχὲς ἀνάλογον ἐμπίπτουσιν ἀριθμοί, τοσοῦτοι καὶ εἰς
τοὺς Α, Β μεταξὺ κατὰ τὸ συνεχὲς ἐμπεσοῦνται· ὅπερ ἔδει
238
STOIQEIWN hþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 8
δεῖξαι.
iaþ. Proposition 11
Δύο τετραγώνων ἀριθμῶν εἷς μέσος ἀνάλογόν ἐστιν There exists one number in mean proportion to two
ἀριθμός, καὶ ὁ τετράγωνος πρὸς τὸν τετράγωνον δι- (given) square numbers.† And (one) square (number)
πλασίονα λόγον ἔχει ἤπερ ἡ πλευρὰ πρὸς τὴν πλευράν. has to the (other) square (number) a squared‡
ratio with
respect to (that) the side (of the former has) to the side
(of the latter).
∆
Α
Β
Γ
Ε
D
A
B
C
E
῎Εστωσαν τετράγωνοι ἀριθμοὶ οἱ Α, Β, καὶ τοῦ μὲν Α Let A and B be square numbers, and let C be the side
πλευρὰ ἔστω ὁ Γ, τοῦ δὲ Β ὁ Δ· λέγω, ὅτι τῶν Α, Β εἷς of A, and D (the side) of B. I say that there exists one
μέσος ἀνάλογόν ἐστιν ἀριθμός, καὶ ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν Β δι- number in mean proportion to A and B, and that A has
πλασίονα λόγον ἔχει ἤπερ ὁ Γ πρὸς τὸν Δ. to B a squared ratio with respect to (that) C (has) to D.
῾Ο Γ γὰρ τὸν Δ πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Ε ποιείτω. καὶ For let C make E (by) multiplying D. And since A is
ἐπεὶ τετράγωνός ἐστιν ὁ Α, πλευρὰ δὲ αὐτοῦ ἐστιν ὁ Γ, ὁ Γ square, and C is its side, C has thus made A (by) multiἄρα ἑαυτὸν πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Α πεποίηκεν. διὰ τὰ αὐτὰ plying itself. And so, for the same (reasons), D has made
δὴ καὶ ὁ Δ ἑαυτὸν πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Β πεποίηκεν. ἐπεὶ B (by) multiplying itself. Therefore, since C has made A,
οὖν ὁ Γ ἑκάτερον τῶν Γ, Δ πολλαπλασιάσας ἑκάτερον τῶν E (by) multiplying C, D, respectively, thus as C is to D,
Α, Ε πεποίηκεν, ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς ὁ Γ πρὸς τὸν Δ, οὕτως ὁ Α so A (is) to E [Prop. 7.17]. And so, for the same (reaπρὸς τὸν Ε. διὰ τὰ αὐτὰ δὴ καὶ ὡς ὁ Γ πρὸς τὸν Δ, οὕτως ὁ sons), as C (is) to D, so E (is) to B [Prop. 7.18]. And
Ε πρὸς τὸν Β. καὶ ὡς ἄρα ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν Ε, οὕτως ὁ Ε πρὸς thus as A (is) to E, so E (is) to B. Thus, one number
τὸν Β. τῶν Α, Β ἄρα εἷς μέσος ἀνάλογόν ἐστιν ἀριθμός. (namely, E) is in mean proportion to A and B.
Λέγω δή, ὅτι καὶ ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν Β διπλασίονα λόγον ἔχει So I say that A also has to B a squared ratio with
ἤπερ ὁ Γ πρὸς τὸν Δ. ἐπεὶ γὰρ τρεῖς ἀριθμοὶ ἀνάλογόν εἰσιν respect to (that) C (has) to D. For since A, E, B are
οἱ Α, Ε, Β, ὁ Α ἄρα πρὸς τὸν Β διπλασίονα λόγον ἔχει ἤπερ three (continuously) proportional numbers, A thus has
ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν Ε. ὡς δὲ ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν Ε, οὕτως ὁ Γ πρὸς to B a squared ratio with respect to (that) A (has) to E
τὸν Δ. ὁ Α ἄρα πρὸς τὸν Β διπλασίονα λόγον ἔχει ἤπερ ἡ [Def. 5.9]. And as A (is) to E, so C (is) to D. Thus, A has
Γ πλευρὰ πρὸς τὴν Δ· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. to B a squared ratio with respect to (that) side C (has)
to (side) D. (Which is) the very thing it was required to
show.
†
In other words, between two given square numbers there exists a number in continued proportion.
‡ Literally, “double”.
ibþ. Proposition 12
Δύο κύβων ἀριθμῶν δύο μέσοι ἀνάλογόν εἰσιν ἀριθμοί, There exist two numbers in mean proportion to two
καὶ ὁ κύβος πρὸς τὸν κύβον τριπλασίονα λόγον ἔχει ἤπερ ἡ (given) cube numbers.† And (one) cube (number) has to
πλευρὰ πρὸς τὴν πλευράν. the (other) cube (number) a cubed‡
ratio with respect
῎Εστωσαν κύβοι ἀριθμοὶ οἱ Α, Β καὶ τοῦ μὲν Α πλευρὰ to (that) the side (of the former has) to the side (of the
ἔστω ὁ Γ, τοῦ δὲ Β ὁ Δ· λέγω, ὅτι τῶν Α, Β δύο μέσοι latter).
ἀνάλογόν εἰσιν ἀριθμοί, καὶ ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν Β τριπλασίονα Let A and B be cube numbers, and let C be the side
λόγον ἔχει ἤπερ ὁ Γ πρὸς τὸν Δ. of A, and D (the side) of B. I say that there exist two
numbers in mean proportion to A and B, and that A has
239
STOIQEIWN hþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 8
to B a cubed ratio with respect to (that) C (has) to D.
Θ
Α
Β
Γ
∆
Ε
Ζ
Η
Κ K
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
῾Ο γὰρ Γ ἑαυτὸν μὲν πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Ε ποιείτω, For let C make E (by) multiplying itself, and let it
τὸν δὲ Δ πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Ζ ποιείτω, ὁ δὲ Δ ἑαυτὸν make F (by) multiplying D. And let D make G (by) mulπολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Η ποιείτω, ἑκάτερος δὲ τῶν Γ, Δ τὸν tiplying itself, and let C, D make H, K, respectively, (by)
Ζ πολλαπλασιάσας ἑκάτερον τῶν Θ, Κ ποιείτω. multiplying F.
Καὶ ἐπεὶ κύβος ἐστὶν ὁ Α, πλευρὰ δὲ αὐτοῦ ὁ Γ, καὶ ὁ And since A is cube, and C (is) its side, and C has
Γ ἑαυτὸν μὲν πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Ε πεποίηκεν, ὁ Γ ἄρα made E (by) multiplying itself, C has thus made E (by)
ἑαυτὸν μὲν πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Ε πεποίηκεν, τὸν δὲ Ε multiplying itself, and has made A (by) multiplying E.
πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Α πεποίηκεν. διὰ τὰ αὐτὰ δὴ καὶ ὁ And so, for the same (reasons), D has made G (by) mulΔ ἑαυτὸν μὲν πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Η πεποίηκεν, τὸν δὲ Η tiplying itself, and has made B (by) multiplying G. And
πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Β πεποίηκεν. καὶ ἐπεὶ ὁ Γ ἑκάτερον since C has made E, F (by) multiplying C, D, respecτῶν Γ, Δ πολλαπλασιάσας ἑκάτερον τῶν Ε, Ζ πεποίηκεν, tively, thus as C is to D, so E (is) to F [Prop. 7.17]. And
ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς ὁ Γ πρὸς τὸν Δ, οὕτως ὁ Ε πρὸς τὸν Ζ. so, for the same (reasons), as C (is) to D, so F (is) to G
διὰ τὰ αὐτὰ δὴ καὶ ὡς ὁ Γ πρὸς τὸν Δ, οὕτως ὁ Ζ πρὸς [Prop. 7.18]. Again, since C has made A, H (by) multiτὸν Η. πάλιν, ἐπεὶ ὁ Γ ἑκάτερον τῶν Ε, Ζ πολλαπλασιάσας plying E, F, respectively, thus as E is to F, so A (is) to
ἑκάτερον τῶν Α, Θ πεποίηκεν, ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς ὁ Ε πρὸς τὸν H [Prop. 7.17]. And as E (is) to F, so C (is) to D. And
Ζ, οὕτως ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν Θ. ὡς δὲ ὁ Ε πρὸς τὸν Ζ, οὕτως ὁ Γ thus as C (is) to D, so A (is) to H. Again, since C, D
πρὸς τὸν Δ· καὶ ὡς ἄρα ὁ Γ πρὸς τὸν Δ, οὕτως ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν have made H, K, respectively, (by) multiplying F, thus
Θ. πάλιν, ἐπεὶ ἑκάτερος τῶν Γ, Δ τὸν Ζ πολλαπλασιάσας as C is to D, so H (is) to K [Prop. 7.18]. Again, since D
ἑκάτερον τῶν Θ, Κ πεποίηκεν, ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς ὁ Γ πρὸς τὸν has made K, B (by) multiplying F, G, respectively, thus
Δ, οὕτως ὁ Θ πρὸς τὸν Κ. πάλιν, ἐπεὶ ὁ Δ ἑκάτερον τῶν as F is to G, so K (is) to B [Prop. 7.17]. And as F (is)
Ζ, Η πολλαπλασιάσας ἑκάτερον τῶν Κ, Β πεποίηκεν, ἔστιν to G, so C (is) to D. And thus as C (is) to D, so A (is)
ἄρα ὡς ὁ Ζ πρὸς τὸν Η, οὕτως ὁ Κ πρὸς τὸν Β. ὡς δὲ ὁ Ζ to H, and H to K, and K to B. Thus, H and K are two
πρὸς τὸν Η, οὕτως ὁ Γ πρὸς τὸν Δ· καὶ ὡς ἄρα ὁ Γ πρὸς (numbers) in mean proportion to A and B.
τὸν Δ, οὕτως ὅ τε Α πρὸς τὸν Θ καὶ ὁ Θ πρὸς τὸν Κ καὶ So I say that A also has to B a cubed ratio with reὁ Κ πρὸς τὸν Β. τῶν Α, Β ἄρα δύο μέσοι ἀνάλογόν εἰσιν spect to (that) C (has) to D. For since A, H, K, B are
οἱ Θ, Κ. four (continuously) proportional numbers, A thus has
Λέγω δή, ὅτι καὶ ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν Β τριπλασίονα λόγον ἔχει to B a cubed ratio with respect to (that) A (has) to H
ἤπερ ὁ Γ πρὸς τὸν Δ. ἐπεὶ γὰρ τέσσαρες ἀριθμοὶ ἀνάλογόν [Def. 5.10]. And as A (is) to H, so C (is) to D. And
εἰσιν οἱ Α, Θ, Κ, Β, ὁ Α ἄρα πρὸς τὸν Β τριπλασίονα λόγον [thus] A has to B a cubed ratio with respect to (that) C
ἔχει ἤπερ ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν Θ. ὡς δὲ ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν Θ, οὕτως ὁ (has) to D. (Which is) the very thing it was required to
Γ πρὸς τὸν Δ· καὶ ὁ Α [ἄρα] πρὸς τὸν Β τριπλασίονα λόγον show.
ἔχει ἤπερ ὁ Γ πρὸς τὸν Δ· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι.
†
In other words, between two given cube numbers there exist two numbers in continued proportion.
‡ Literally, “triple”.
igþ. Proposition 13
᾿Εὰν ὦσιν ὁσοιδηποτοῦν ἀριθμοὶ ἑξῆς ἀνάλογον, καὶ If there are any multitude whatsoever of continuously
πολλαπλασιάσας ἕκαστος ἑαυτὸν ποιῇ τινα, οἱ γενόμενοι proportional numbers, and each makes some (number
ἐξ αὐτῶν ἀνάλογον ἔσονται· καὶ ἐὰν οἱ ἐξ ἀρχῆς τοὺς by) multiplying itself, then the (numbers) created from
γενομένους πολλαπλασιάσαντες ποιῶσί τινας, καὶ αὐτοὶ them will (also) be (continuously) proportional. And if
ἀνάλογον ἔσονται [καὶ ἀεὶ περὶ τοὺς ἄκρους τοῦτο συμβαίνει]. the original (numbers) make some (more numbers by)
῎Εστωσαν ὁποσοιοῦν ἀριθμοὶ ἑξῆς ἀνάλογον, οἱ Α, Β, multiplying the created (numbers) then these will also
240
STOIQEIWN hþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 8
Γ, ὡς ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν Β, οὕτως ὁ Β πρὸς τὸν Γ, καὶ οἱ be (continuously) proportional [and this always happens
Α, Β, Γ ἑαυτοὺς μὲν πολλαπλασιάσαντες τοὺς Δ, Ε, Ζ with the extremes].
ποιείτωσαν, τοὺς δὲ Δ, Ε, Ζ πολλαπλασιάσαντες τοὺς Η, Let A, B, C be any multitude whatsoever of continΘ, Κ ποιείτωσαν· λέγω, ὅτι οἵ τε Δ, Ε, Ζ καὶ οἱ Η, Θ, Κ uously proportional numbers, (such that) as A (is) to B,
ἑξῆς ἀνάλογον εἰσιν. so B (is) to C. And let A, B, C make D, E, F (by)
multiplying themselves, and let them make G, H, K (by)
multiplying D, E, F. I say that D, E, F and G, H, K are
continuously proportional.
Π
Α
Β
Γ
∆
Ε
Ζ
Κ
Θ
Η
Λ
Ξ
Μ
Ν
Ο P
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
K
L
O
M
N
Q
῾Ο μὲν γὰρ Α τὸν Β πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Λ ποιείτω, For let A make L (by) multiplying B. And let A, B
ἑκάτερος δὲ τῶν Α, Β τὸν Λ πολλαπλασιάσας ἑκάτερον τῶν make M, N, respectively, (by) multiplying L. And, again,
Μ, Ν ποιείτω. καὶ πάλιν ὁ μὲν Β τὸν Γ πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν let B make O (by) multiplying C. And let B, C make P,
Ξ ποιείτω, ἑκάτερος δὲ τῶν Β, Γ τὸν Ξ πολλαπλασιάσας Q, respectively, (by) multplying O.
ἑκάτερον τῶν Ο, Π ποιείτω. So, similarly to the above, we can show that D, L,
῾Ομοίως δὴ τοῖς ἐπάνω δεῖξομεν, ὅτι οἱ Δ, Λ, Ε καὶ οἱ E and G, M, N, H are continuously proportional in the
Η, Μ, Ν, Θ ἑξῆς εἰσιν ἀνάλογον ἐν τῷ τοῦ Α πρὸς τὸν ratio of A to B, and, further, (that) E, O, F and H, P, Q,
Β λόγῳ, καὶ ἔτι οἱ Ε, Ξ, Ζ καὶ οἱ Θ, Ο, Π, Κ ἑξῆς εἰσιν K are continuously proportional in the ratio of B to C.
ἀνάλογον ἐν τῷ τοῦ Β πρὸς τὸν Γ λόγῳ. καί ἐστιν ὡς ὁ Α And as A is to B, so B (is) to C. And thus D, L, E are in
πρὸς τὸν Β, οὕτως ὁ Β πρὸς τὸν Γ· καὶ οἱ Δ, Λ, Ε ἄρα τοῖς the same ratio as E, O, F, and, further, G, M, N, H (are
Ε, Ξ, Ζ ἐν τῷ αὐτῷ λόγῳ εἰσὶ καὶ ἔτι οἱ Η, Μ, Ν, Θ τοῖς in the same ratio) as H, P, Q, K. And the multitude of
Θ, Ο, Π, Κ. καί ἐστιν ἴσον τὸ μὲν τῶν Δ, Λ, Ε πλῆθος τῷ D, L, E is equal to the multitude of E, O, F, and that of
τῶν Ε, Ξ, Ζ πλήθει, τὸ δὲ τῶν Η, Μ, Ν, Θ τῷ τῶν Θ, Ο, G, M, N, H to that of H, P, Q, K. Thus, via equality, as
Π, Κ· δι᾿ ἴσου ἄρα ἐστὶν ὡς μὲν ὁ Δ πρὸς τὸν Ε, οὕτως ὁ D is to E, so E (is) to F, and as G (is) to H, so H (is) to
Ε πρὸς τὸν Ζ, ὡς δὲ ὁ Η πρὸς τὸν Θ, οὕτως ὁ Θ πρὸς τὸν K [Prop. 7.14]. (Which is) the very thing it was required
Κ· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. to show.
idþ. Proposition 14
᾿Εὰν τετράγωνος τετράγωνον μετρῇ, καὶ ἡ πλευρὰ τὴν If a square (number) measures a(nother) square
πλευρὰν μετρήσει· καὶ ἐὰν ἡ πλευρὰ τὴν πλευρὰν μετρῇ, καὶ (number) then the side (of the former) will also meaὁ τετράγωνος τὸν τετράγωνον μετρήσει. sure the side (of the latter). And if the side (of a square
῎Εστωσαν τετράγωνοι ἀριθμοὶ οἱ Α, Β, πλευραὶ δὲ αὐτῶν number) measures the side (of another square number)
ἔστωσαν οἱ Γ, Δ, ὁ δὲ Α τὸν Β μετρείτω· λέγω, ὅτι καὶ ὁ then the (former) square (number) will also measure the
Γ τὸν Δ μετρεῖ. (latter) square (number).
Let A and B be square numbers, and let C and D be
their sides (respectively). And let A measure B. I say that
C also measures D.
241
STOIQEIWN hþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 8
∆
Α
Β
Ε
Γ
D
A
B
E
C
῾Ο Γ γὰρ τὸν Δ πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Ε ποιείτω· οἱ Α, Ε, For let C make E (by) multiplying D. Thus, A, E,
Β ἄρα ἑξῆς ἀνάλογόν εἰσιν ἐν τῷ τοῦ Γ πρὸς τὸν Δ λόγῳ. B are continuously proportional in the ratio of C to D
καὶ ἐπεὶ οἱ Α, Ε, Β ἐξῆς ἀνάλογόν εἰσιν, καὶ μετρεῖ ὁ Α τὸν [Prop. 8.11]. And since A, E, B are continuously proΒ, μετρεῖ ἄρα καὶ ὁ Α τὸν Ε. καί ἐστιν ὡς ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν Ε, portional, and A measures B, A thus also measures E
οὕτως ὁ Γ πρὸς τὸν Δ· μετρεῖ ἄρα καὶ ὁ Γ τὸν Δ. [Prop. 8.7]. And as A is to E, so C (is) to D. Thus, C
Πάλιν δὴ ὁ Γ τὸν Δ μετρείτω· λέγω, ὅτι καὶ ὁ Α τὸν Β also measures D [Def. 7.20].
μετρεῖ. So, again, let C measure D. I say that A also measures
Τῶν γὰρ αὐτῶν κατασκευασθέντων ὁμοίως δείξομεν, B.
ὅτι οἱ Α, Ε, Β ἑξῆς ἀνάλογόν εἰσιν ἐν τῷ τοῦ Γ πρὸς τὸν Δ For similarly, with the same construction, we can
λόγῳ. καὶ ἐπεί ἐστιν ὡς ὁ Γ πρὸς τὸν Δ, οὕτως ὁ Α πρὸς show that A, E, B are continuously proportional in the
τὸν Ε, μετρεῖ δὲ ὁ Γ τὸν Δ, μετρεῖ ἄρα καὶ ὁ Α τὸν Ε. καί ratio of C to D. And since as C is to D, so A (is) to E,
εἰσιν οἱ Α, Ε, Β ἑξῆς ἀνάλογον· μετρεῖ ἄρα καὶ ὁ Α τὸν Β. and C measures D, A thus also measures E [Def. 7.20].
᾿Εὰν ἄρα τετράγωνος τετράγωνον μετρῇ, καὶ ἡ πλευρὰ And A, E, B are continuously proportional. Thus, A also
τὴν πλευρὰν μετρήσει· καὶ ἐὰν ἡ πλευρὰ τὴν πλευρὰν μετρῇ, measures B.
καὶ ὁ τετράγωνος τὸν τετράγωνον μετρήσει· ὅπερ ἔδει Thus, if a square (number) measures a(nother) square
δεῖξαι. (number) then the side (of the former) will also measure
the side (of the latter). And if the side (of a square number) measures the side (of another square number) then
the (former) square (number) will also measure the (latter) square (number). (Which is) the very thing it was
required to show.
ieþ. Proposition 15
᾿Εὰν κύβος ἀριθμὸς κύβον ἀριθμὸν μετρῇ, καὶ ἡ πλευρὰ If a cube number measures a(nother) cube number
τὴν πλευρὰν μετρήσει· καὶ ἐὰν ἡ πλευρὰ τὴν πλευρὰν μετρῇ, then the side (of the former) will also measure the side
καὶ ὁ κύβος τὸν κύβον μετρήσει. (of the latter). And if the side (of a cube number) meaΚύβος γὰρ ἀριθμὸς ὁ Α κύβον τὸν Β μετρείτω, καὶ τοῦ sures the side (of another cube number) then the (forμὲν Α πλευρὰ ἔστω ὁ Γ, τοῦ δὲ Β ὁ Δ· λέγω, ὅτι ὁ Γ τὸν mer) cube (number) will also measure the (latter) cube
Δ μετρεῖ. (number).
For let the cube number A measure the cube (number) B, and let C be the side of A, and D (the side) of B.
I say that C measures D.
Α Γ
Β
Ε
Η
Ζ
Κ
Θ
∆ D
A
B
E
G
F
H
K
C
῾Ο Γ γὰρ ἑαυτὸν πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Ε ποιείτω, ὁ δὲ Δ For let C make E (by) multiplying itself. And let
242
STOIQEIWN hþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 8
ἑαυτὸν πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Η ποιείτω, καὶ ἔτι ὁ Γ τὸν Δ D make G (by) multiplying itself. And, further, [let] C
πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Ζ [ποιείτω], ἑκάτερος δὲ τῶν Γ, Δ τὸν [make] F (by) multiplying D, and let C, D make H, K,
Ζ πολλαπλασιάσας ἑκάτερον τῶν Θ, Κ ποιείτω. φανερὸν respectively, (by) multiplying F. So it is clear that E, F,
δή, ὅτι οἱ Ε, Ζ, Η καὶ οἱ Α, Θ, Κ, Β ἑξῆς ἀνάλογόν εἰσιν G and A, H, K, B are continuously proportional in the
ἐν τῷ τοῦ Γ πρὸς τὸν Δ λόγῳ. καὶ ἐπεὶ οἱ Α, Θ, Κ, Β ἑξῆς ratio of C to D [Prop. 8.12]. And since A, H, K, B are
ἀνάλογόν εἰσιν, καὶ μετρεῖ ὁ Α τὸν Β, μετρεῖ ἄρα καὶ τὸν continuously proportional, and A measures B, (A) thus
Θ. καί ἐστιν ὡς ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν Θ, οὕτως ὁ Γ πρὸς τὸν Δ· also measures H [Prop. 8.7]. And as A is to H, so C (is)
μετρεῖ ἄρα καὶ ὁ Γ τὸν Δ. to D. Thus, C also measures D [Def. 7.20].
᾿Αλλὰ δὴ μετρείτω ὁ Γ τὸν Δ· λέγω, ὅτι καὶ ὁ Α τὸν Β And so let C measure D. I say that A will also meaμετρήσει. sure B.
Τῶν γὰρ αὐτῶν κατασκευασθέντων ὁμοίως δὴ δείξομεν, For similarly, with the same construction, we can
ὅτι οἱ Α, Θ, Κ, Β ἑξῆς ἀνάλογόν εἰσιν ἐν τῷ τοῦ Γ πρὸς show that A, H, K, B are continuously proportional in
τὸν Δ λόγῳ. καὶ ἐπεὶ ὁ Γ τὸν Δ μετρεῖ, καί ἐστιν ὡς ὁ Γ the ratio of C to D. And since C measures D, and as C is
πρὸς τὸν Δ, οὕτως ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν Θ, καὶ ὁ Α ἄρα τὸν Θ to D, so A (is) to H, A thus also measures H [Def. 7.20].
μετρεῖ· ὥστε καὶ τὸν Β μετρεῖ ὁ Α· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. Hence, A also measures B. (Which is) the very thing it
was required to show.
iþ. Proposition 16
᾿Εὰν τετράγωνος ἀριθμὸς τετράγωνον ἀριθμὸν μὴ If a square number does not measure a(nother)
μετρῇ, οὐδὲ ἡ πλευρὰ τὴν πλευρὰν μετρήσει· κἂν ἡ πλευρὰ square number then the side (of the former) will not
τὴν πλευρὰν μὴ μετρῇ, οὐδὲ ὁ τετράγωνος τὸν τετράγωνον measure the side (of the latter) either. And if the side (of
μετρήσει. a square number) does not measure the side (of another
square number) then the (former) square (number) will
not measure the (latter) square (number) either.
∆
Α
Β
Γ . A
B
C
D
῎Εστωσαν τετρὰγωνοι ἀριθμοὶ οἱ Α, Β, πλευραὶ δὲ αὐτῶν Let A and B be square numbers, and let C and D be
ἔστωσαν οἱ Γ, Δ, καὶ μὴ μετρείτω ὁ Α τὸν Β· λὲγω, ὅτι οὐδὲ their sides (respectively). And let A not measure B. I say
ὁ Γ τὸν Δ μετρεῖ. that C does not measure D either.
Εἰ γὰρ μετρεῖ ὁ Γ τὸν Δ, μετρήσει καὶ ὁ Α τὸν Β. οὐ For if C measures D then A will also measure B
μετρεῖ δὲ ὁ Α τὸν Β· οὐδὲ ἄρα ὁ Γ τὸν Δ μετρήσει. [Prop. 8.14]. And A does not measure B. Thus, C will
Μὴ μετρείτω [δὴ] πάλιν ὁ Γ τὸν Δ· λέγω, ὅτι οὐδὲ ὁ Α not measure D either.
τὸν Β μετρήσει. [So], again, let C not measure D. I say that A will not
Εἰ γὰρ μετρεῖ ὁ Α τὸν Β, μετρήσει καὶ ὁ Γ τὸν Δ. οὐ measure B either.
μετρεῖ δὲ ὁ Γ τὸν Δ· οὐδ᾿ ἄρα ὁ Α τὸν Β μετρήσει· ὅπερ For if A measures B then C will also measure D
ἔδει δεῖξαι. [Prop. 8.14]. And C does not measure D. Thus, A will
not measure B either. (Which is) the very thing it was
required to show.
izþ. Proposition 17
᾿Εὰν κύβος ἀριθμὸς κύβον ἀριθμὸν μὴ μετρῇ, οὐδὲ ἡ If a cube number does not measure a(nother) cube
πλευρὰ τὴν πλευρὰν μετρήσει· κἂν ἡ πλευρὰ τὴν πλευρὰν number then the side (of the former) will not measure the
μὴ μετρῇ, οὐδὲ ὁ κύβος τὸν κύβον μετρήσει. side (of the latter) either. And if the side (of a cube number) does not measure the side (of another cube number)
then the (former) cube (number) will not measure the
(latter) cube (number) either.
243
STOIQEIWN hþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 8
∆
Α
Β
Γ . A
B
C
D
Κύβος γὰρ ἀριθμὸς ὁ Α κύβον ἀριθμὸν τὸν Β μὴ με- For let the cube number A not measure the cube numτρείτω, καὶ τοῦ μὲν Α πλευρὰ ἔστω ὁ Γ, τοῦ δὲ Β ὁ Δ· ber B. And let C be the side of A, and D (the side) of B.
λέγω, ὅτι ὁ Γ τὸν Δ οὐ μετρήσει. I say that C will not measure D.
Εἰ γὰρ μετρεῖ ὁ Γ τὸν Δ, καὶ ὁ Α τὸν Β μετρήσει. οὐ For if C measures D then A will also measure B
μετρεῖ δὲ ὁ Α τὸν Β· οὐδ᾿ ἄρα ὁ Γ τὸν Δ μετρεῖ. [Prop. 8.15]. And A does not measure B. Thus, C does
᾿Αλλὰ δὴ μὴ μετρείτω ὁ Γ τὸν Δ· λέγω, ὅτι οὐδὲ ὁ Α not measure D either.
τὸν Β μετρήσει. And so let C not measure D. I say that A will not
Εἰ γὰρ ὁ Α τὸν Β μετρεῖ, καὶ ὁ Γ τὸν Δ μετρήσει. οὐ measure B either.
μετρεῖ δὲ ὁ Γ τὸν Δ· οὐδ᾿ ἄρα ὁ Α τὸν Β μετρήσει· ὅπερ For if A measures B then C will also measure D
ἔδει δεῖξαι. [Prop. 8.15]. And C does not measure D. Thus, A will
not measure B either. (Which is) the very thing it was
required to show.
ihþ. Proposition 18
Δύο ὁμοίων ἐπιπέδων ἀριθμῶν εἷς μέσος ἀνάλογόν ἐστιν There exists one number in mean proportion to two
ἀριθμός· καὶ ὁ ἐπίπεδος πρὸς τὸν ἐπίπεδον διπλασίονα λόγον similar plane numbers. And (one) plane (number) has to
ἔχει ἤπερ ἡ ὁμόλογος πλευρὰ πρὸς τὴν ὁμόλογον πλευράν. the (other) plane (number) a squared†
ratio with respect
to (that) a corresponding side (of the former has) to a
corresponding side (of the latter).
Α Β
Γ
∆
Η
Ζ
Ε E
A
C
G
D
B
F
῎Εστωσαν δύο ὅμοιοι ἐπίπεδοι ἀριθμοὶ οἱ Α, Β, καὶ τοῦ Let A and B be two similar plane numbers. And let
μὲν Α πλευραὶ ἔστωσαν οἱ Γ, Δ ἀριθμοί, τοῦ δὲ Β οἱ Ε, the numbers C, D be the sides of A, and E, F (the sides)
Ζ. καὶ ἐπεὶ ὅμοιοι ἐπίπεδοί εἰσιν οἱ ἀνάλογον ἔχοντες τὰς of B. And since similar numbers are those having proπλευράς, ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς ὁ Γ πρὸς τὸν Δ, οὕτως ὁ Ε πρὸς portional sides [Def. 7.21], thus as C is to D, so E (is) to
τὸν Ζ. λέγω οὖν, ὅτι τῶν Α, Β εἷς μέσος ἀνάλογόν ἐστιν F. Therefore, I say that there exists one number in mean
ἀριθμός, καὶ ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν Β διπλασίονα λόγον ἔχει ἤπερ ὁ proportion to A and B, and that A has to B a squared
Γ πρὸς τὸν Ε ἢ ὁ Δ πρὸς τὸν Ζ, τουτέστιν ἤπερ ἡ ὁμόλογος ratio with respect to that C (has) to E, or D to F—that is
πλευρὰ πρὸς τὴν ὁμόλογον [πλευράν]. to say, with respect to (that) a corresponding side (has)
Καὶ ἐπεί ἐστιν ὡς ὁ Γ πρὸς τὸν Δ, οὕτως ὁ Ε πρὸς τὸν to a corresponding [side].
Ζ, ἐναλλὰξ ἄρα ἐστὶν ὡς ὁ Γ πρὸς τὸν Ε, ὁ Δ πρὸς τὸν Ζ. For since as C is to D, so E (is) to F, thus, alternately,
καὶ ἐπεὶ ἐπίπεδός ἐστιν ὁ Α, πλευραὶ δὲ αὐτοῦ οἱ Γ, Δ, ὁ Δ as C is to E, so D (is) to F [Prop. 7.13]. And since A is
ἄρα τὸν Γ πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Α πεποίηκεν. διὰ τὰ αὐτὰ plane, and C, D its sides, D has thus made A (by) mulδὴ καὶ ὁ Ε τὸν Ζ πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Β πεποίηκεν. ὁ Δ tiplying C. And so, for the same (reasons), E has made
δὴ τὸν Ε πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Η ποιείτω. καὶ ἐπεὶ ὁ Δ τὸν B (by) multiplying F. So let D make G (by) multiplying
μὲν Γ πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Α πεποίηκεν, τὸν δὲ Ε πολλα- E. And since D has made A (by) multiplying C, and has
πλασιάσας τὸν Η πεποίηκεν, ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς ὁ Γ πρὸς τὸν Ε, made G (by) multiplying E, thus as C is to E, so A (is) to
οὕτως ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν Η. ἀλλ᾿ ὡς ὁ Γ πρὸς τὸν Ε, [οὕτως] G [Prop. 7.17]. But as C (is) to E, [so] D (is) to F. And
ὁ Δ πρὸς τὸν Ζ· καὶ ὡς ἄρα ὁ Δ πρὸς τὸν Ζ, οὕτως ὁ Α thus as D (is) to F, so A (is) to G. Again, since E has
πρὸς τὸν Η. πάλιν, ἐπεὶ ὁ Ε τὸν μὲν Δ πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν made G (by) multiplying D, and has made B (by) multiΗ πεποίηκεν, τὸν δὲ Ζ πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Β πεποίηκεν, plying F, thus as D is to F, so G (is) to B [Prop. 7.17].
ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς ὁ Δ πρὸς τὸν Ζ, οὕτως ὁ Η πρὸς τὸν Β. And it was also shown that as D (is) to F, so A (is) to G.
ἐδείχθη δὲ καὶ ὡς ὁ Δ πρὸς τὸν Ζ, οὕτως ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν And thus as A (is) to G, so G (is) to B. Thus, A, G, B are
244
STOIQEIWN hþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 8
Η· καὶ ὡς ἄρα ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν Η, οὕτως ὁ Η πρὸς τὸν Β. οἱ continously proportional. Thus, there exists one number
Α, Η, Β ἄρα ἑξῆς ἀνάλογόν εἰσιν. τῶν Α, Β ἄρα εἷς μέσος (namely, G) in mean proportion to A and B.
ἀνάλογόν ἐστιν ἀριθμός. So I say that A also has to B a squared ratio with
Λέγω δή, ὅτι καὶ ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν Β διπλασίονα λόγον respect to (that) a corresponding side (has) to a correἔχει ἤπερ ἡ ὁμόλογος πλευρὰ πρὸς τὴν ὁμόλογον πλευράν, sponding side—that is to say, with respect to (that) C
τουτέστιν ἤπερ ὁ Γ πρὸς τὸν Ε ἢ ὁ Δ πρὸς τὸν Ζ. ἐπεὶ γὰρ (has) to E, or D to F. For since A, G, B are continuously
οἱ Α, Η, Β ἑξῆς ἀνάλογόν εἰσιν, ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν Β διπλασίονα proportional, A has to B a squared ratio with respect to
λόγον ἔχει ἤπερ πρὸς τὸν Η. καί ἐστιν ὡς ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν Η, (that A has) to G [Prop. 5.9]. And as A is to G, so C (is)
οὕτως ὅ τε Γ πρὸς τὸν Ε καὶ ὁ Δ πρὸς τὸν Ζ. καὶ ὁ Α ἄρα to E, and D to F. And thus A has to B a squared ratio
πρὸς τὸν Β διπλασίονα λόγον ἔχει ἤπερ ὁ Γ πρὸς τὸν Ε ἢ with respect to (that) C (has) to E, or D to F. (Which
ὁ Δ πρὸς τὸν Ζ· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. is) the very thing it was required to show.
† Literally, “double”.
ijþ. Proposition 19
Δύο ὁμοίων στερεῶν ἀριθμῶν δύο μέσοι ἀνάλογον Two numbers fall (between) two similar solid numἐμπίπτουσιν ἀριθμοί· καὶ ὁ στερεὸς πρὸς τὸν ὅμοιον στερεὸν bers in mean proportion. And a solid (number) has to
τριπλασίονα λόγον ἔχει ἤπερ ἡ ὁμόλογος πλευρὰ πρὸς τὴν a similar solid (number) a cubed†
ratio with respect to
ὁμόλογον πλευράν. (that) a corresponding side (has) to a corresponding side.
Ξ
Α
Β
Κ
Μ
Λ
Γ
∆
Ε
Ζ
Η
Θ
Ν
O
A
B
K
M
L
D
E
F
G
H
C
N
῎Εστωσαν δύο ὅμοιοι στερεοὶ οἱ Α, Β, καὶ τοῦ μὲν Α Let A and B be two similar solid numbers, and let
πλευραὶ ἔστωσαν οἱ Γ, Δ, Ε, τοῦ δὲ Β οἱ Ζ, Η, Θ. καὶ ἐπεὶ C, D, E be the sides of A, and F, G, H (the sides) of
ὅμοιοι στερεοί εἰσιν οἱ ἀνάλογον ἔχοντες τὰς πλευράς, ἔστιν B. And since similar solid (numbers) are those having
ἄρα ὡς μὲν ὁ Γ πρὸς τὸν Δ, οὕτως ὁ Ζ πρὸς τὸν Η, ὡς δὲ proportional sides [Def. 7.21], thus as C is to D, so F
ὁ Δ πρὸς τὸν Ε, οὕτως ὁ Η πρὸς τὸν Θ. λέγω, ὅτι τῶν Α, (is) to G, and as D (is) to E, so G (is) to H. I say that
Β δύο μέσοι ἀνάλογόν ἐμπίπτουσιν ἀριθμοί, καὶ ὁ Α πρὸς two numbers fall (between) A and B in mean proportion,
τὸν Β τριπλασίονα λόγον ἔχει ἤπερ ὁ Γ πρὸς τὸν Ζ καὶ ὁ and (that) A has to B a cubed ratio with respect to (that)
Δ πρὸς τὸν Η καὶ ἔτι ὁ Ε πρὸς τὸν Θ. C (has) to F, and D to G, and, further, E to H.
῾Ο Γ γὰρ τὸν Δ πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Κ ποιείτω, ὁ δὲ For let C make K (by) multiplying D, and let F make
Ζ τὸν Η πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Λ ποιείτω. καὶ ἐπεὶ οἱ Γ, L (by) multiplying G. And since C, D are in the same
Δ τοὶς Ζ, Η ἐν τῷ αὐτῷ λόγῳ εἰσίν, καὶ ἐκ μὲν τῶν Γ, ratio as F, G, and K is the (number created) from (mulΔ ἐστιν ὁ Κ, ἐκ δὲ τῶν Ζ, Η ὁ Λ, οἱ Κ, Λ [ἄρα] ὅμοιοι tiplying) C, D, and L the (number created) from (multiἐπίπεδοί εἰσιν ἀριθμοί· τῶν Κ, Λ ἄρα εἷς μέσος ἀνάλογόν plying) F, G, [thus] K and L are similar plane numbers
ἐστιν ἀριθμός. ἔστω ὁ Μ. ὁ Μ ἄρα ἐστὶν ὁ ἐκ τῶν Δ, [Def. 7.21]. Thus, there exits one number in mean proΖ, ὡς ἐν τῷ πρὸ τούτου θεωρήματι ἐδείχθη. καὶ ἐπεὶ ὁ portion to K and L [Prop. 8.18]. Let it be M. Thus, M is
Δ τὸν μὲν Γ πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Κ πεποίηκεν, τὸν δὲ Ζ the (number created) from (multiplying) D, F, as shown
πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Μ πεποίηκεν, ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς ὁ Γ πρὸς in the theorem before this (one). And since D has made
τὸν Ζ, οὕτως ὁ Κ πρὸς τὸν Μ. ἀλλ᾿ ὡς ὁ Κ πρὸς τὸν Μ, K (by) multiplying C, and has made M (by) multiplying
ὁ Μ πρὸς τὸν Λ. οἱ Κ, Μ, Λ ἄρα ἑξῆς εἰσιν ἀνάλογον ἐν F, thus as C is to F, so K (is) to M [Prop. 7.17]. But, as
245
STOIQEIWN hþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 8
τῷ τοῦ Γ πρὸς τὸν Ζ λόγῷ. καὶ ἐπεί ἐστιν ὡς ὁ Γ πρὸς τὸν K (is) to M, (so) M (is) to L. Thus, K, M, L are continΔ, οὕτως ὁ Ζ πρὸς τὸν Η, ἐναλλὰξ ἄρα ἐστὶν ὡς ὁ Γ πρὸς uously proportional in the ratio of C to F. And since as
τὸν Ζ, οὕτως ὁ Δ πρὸς τὸν Η. διὰ τὰ αὐτὰ δὴ καὶ ὡς ὁ Δ C is to D, so F (is) to G, thus, alternately, as C is to F, so
πρὸς τὸν Η, οὕτως ὁ Ε πρὸς τὸν Θ. οἱ Κ, Μ, Λ ἄρα ἑξῆς D (is) to G [Prop. 7.13]. And so, for the same (reasons),
εἰσιν ἀνάλογον ἔν τε τῷ τοῦ Γ πρὸς τὸν Ζ λόγῳ καὶ τῷ as D (is) to G, so E (is) to H. Thus, K, M, L are continτοῦ Δ πρὸς τὸν Η καὶ ἔτι τῷ τοῦ Ε πρὸς τὸν Θ. ἑκατερος uously proportional in the ratio of C to F, and of D to G,
δὴ τῶν Ε, Θ τὸν Μ πολλαπλασιάσας ἑκάτερον τῶν Ν, Ξ and, further, of E to H. So let E, H make N, O, respecποιείτω. καὶ ἐπεὶ στερεός ἐστιν ὁ Α, πλευραὶ δὲ αὐτοῦ εἰσιν tively, (by) multiplying M. And since A is solid, and C,
οἱ Γ, Δ, Ε, ὁ Ε ἄρα τὸν ἐκ τῶν Γ, Δ πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν D, E are its sides, E has thus made A (by) multiplying
Α πεποίηκεν. ὁ δὲ ἐκ τῶν Γ, Δ ἐστιν ὁ Κ· ὁ Ε ἄρα τὸν Κ the (number created) from (multiplying) C, D. And K
πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Α πεποίηκεν. διὰ τὰ αὐτὰ δὴ καὶ ὁ Θ is the (number created) from (multiplying) C, D. Thus,
τὸν Λ πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Β πεποίηκεν. καὶ ἐπεὶ ὁ Ε τὸν E has made A (by) multiplying K. And so, for the same
Κ πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Α πεποίηκεν, ἀλλὰ μὴν καὶ τὸν Μ (reasons), H has made B (by) multiplying L. And since
πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Ν πεποίηκεν, ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς ὁ Κ πρὸς E has made A (by) multiplying K, but has, in fact, also
τὸν Μ, οὕτως ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν Ν. ὡς δὲ ὁ Κ πρὸς τὸν Μ, made N (by) multiplying M, thus as K is to M, so A (is)
οὕτως ὅ τε Γ πρὸς τὸν Ζ καὶ ὁ Δ πρὸς τὸν Η καὶ ἔτι ὁ Ε to N [Prop. 7.17]. And as K (is) to M, so C (is) to F,
πρὸς τὸν Θ· καὶ ὡς ἄρα ὁ Γ πρὸς τὸν Ζ καὶ ὁ Δ πρὸς τὸν and D to G, and, further, E to H. And thus as C (is) to
Η καὶ ὁ Ε πρὸς τὸν Θ, οὕτως ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν Ν. πάλιν, ἐπεὶ F, and D to G, and E to H, so A (is) to N. Again, since
ἑκάτερος τῶν Ε, Θ τὸν Μ πολλαπλασιάσας ἑκάτερον τῶν E, H have made N, O, respectively, (by) multiplying M,
Ν, Ξ πεποίηκεν, ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς ὁ Ε πρὸς τὸν Θ, οὕτως ὁ Ν thus as E is to H, so N (is) to O [Prop. 7.18]. But, as
πρὸς τὸν Ξ. ἀλλ᾿ ὡς ὁ Ε πρὸς τὸν Θ, οὕτως ὅ τε Γ πρὸς τὸν E (is) to H, so C (is) to F, and D to G. And thus as C
Ζ καὶ ὁ Δ πρὸς τὸν Η· καὶ ὡς ἄρα ὁ Γ πρὸς τὸν Ζ καὶ ὁ Δ (is) to F, and D to G, and E to H, so (is) A to N, and
πρὸς τὸν Η καὶ ὁ Ε πρὸς τὸν Θ, οὕτως ὅ τε Α πρὸς τὸν Ν N to O. Again, since H has made O (by) multiplying M,
καὶ ὁ Ν πρὸς τὸν Ξ. πάλιν, ἐπεὶ ὁ Θ τὸν Μ πολλαπλασιάσας but has, in fact, also made B (by) multiplying L, thus as
τὸν Ξ πεποίηκεν, ἀλλὰ μὴν καὶ τὸν Λ πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν M (is) to L, so O (is) to B [Prop. 7.17]. But, as M (is)
Β πεποίηκεν, ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς ὁ Μ πρὸς τὸν Λ, οὕτως ὁ Ξ πρὸς to L, so C (is) to F, and D to G, and E to H. And thus
τὸν Β. ἀλλ᾿ ὡς ὁ Μ πρὸς τὸν Λ, οὕτως ὅ τε Γ πρὸς τὸν Ζ as C (is) to F, and D to G, and E to H, so not only (is)
καὶ ὁ Δ πρὸς τὸν Η καὶ ὁ Ε πρὸς τὸν Θ. καὶ ὡς ἄρα ὁ Γ O to B, but also A to N, and N to O. Thus, A, N, O,
πρὸς τὸν Ζ καὶ ὁ Δ πρὸς τὸν Η καὶ ὁ Ε πρὸς τὸν Θ, οὕτως B are continuously proportional in the aforementioned
οὐ μόνον ὁ Ξ πρὸς τὸν Β, ἀλλὰ καὶ ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν Ν καὶ ὁ ratios of the sides.
Ν πρὸς τὸν Ξ. οἱ Α, Ν, Ξ, Β ἄρα ἑξῆς εἰσιν ἀνάλογον ἐν So I say that A also has to B a cubed ratio with respect
τοῖς εἰρημένοις τῶν πλευρῶν λόγοις. to (that) a corresponding side (has) to a corresponding
Λέγω, ὅτι καὶ ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν Β τριπλασίονα λόγον side—that is to say, with respect to (that) the number C
ἔχει ἤπερ ἡ ὁμόλογος πλευρὰ πρὸς τὴν ὁμόλογον πλευράν, (has) to F, or D to G, and, further, E to H. For since A,
τουτέστιν ἤπερ ὁ Γ ἀριθμὸς πρὸς τὸν Ζ ἢ ὁ Δ πρὸς τὸν N, O, B are four continuously proportional numbers, A
Η καὶ ἔτι ὁ Ε πρὸς τὸν Θ. ἐπεὶ γὰρ τέσσαρες ἀριθμοὶ ἑξῆς thus has to B a cubed ratio with respect to (that) A (has)
ἀνάλογόν εἰσιν οἱ Α, Ν, Ξ, Β, ὁ Α ἄρα πρὸς τὸν Β τρι- to N [Def. 5.10]. But, as A (is) to N, so it was shown (is)
πλασίονα λόγον ἔχει ἤπερ ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν Ν. ἀλλ᾿ ὡς ὁ Α C to F, and D to G, and, further, E to H. And thus A has
πρὸς τὸν Ν, οὕτως ἐδείχθη ὅ τε Γ πρὸς τὸν Ζ καὶ ὁ Δ πρὸς to B a cubed ratio with respect to (that) a corresponding
τὸν Η καὶ ἔτι ὁ Ε πρὸς τὸν Θ. καὶ ὁ Α ἄρα πρὸς τὸν Β side (has) to a corresponding side—that is to say, with
τριπλασίονα λόγον ἔχει ἤπερ ἡ ομόλογος πλευρὰ πρὸς τὴν respect to (that) the number C (has) to F, and D to G,
ὁμόλογον πλευράν, τουτέστιν ἤπερ ὁ Γ ἀριθμὸς πρὸς τὸν and, further, E to H. (Which is) the very thing it was
Ζ καὶ ὁ Δ πρὸς τὸν Η καὶ ἔτι ὁ Ε πρὸς τὸν Θ· ὅπερ ἔδει required to show.
δεῖξαι.
† Literally, “triple”.
kþ. Proposition 20
᾿Εὰν δύο ἀριθμῶν εἷς μέσος ἀνάλογον ἐμπίπτῇ ἀριθμός, If one number falls between two numbers in mean
ὅμοιοι ἐπίπεδοι ἔσονται οἱ ἀριθμοί. proportion then the numbers will be similar plane (num246
STOIQEIWN hþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 8
Δύο γὰρ ἀριθμῶν τῶν Α, Β εἷς μέσος ἀνάλογον bers).
ἐμπιπτέτω ἀριθμὸς ὁ Γ· λέγω, ὅτι οἱ Α, Β ὅμοιοι ἐπίπεδοί For let one number C fall between the two numbers A
εἰσιν ἀριθμοί. and B in mean proportion. I say that A and B are similar
plane numbers.
Η
Α
Γ
Β
∆
Ζ
Ε
G
A
C
B
D
F
E
Εἰλήφθωσαν [γὰρ] ἐλάχιστοι ἀριθμοὶ τῶν τὸν αὐτὸν [For] let the least numbers, D and E, having the
λόγον ἐχόντων τοῖς Α, Γ οἱ Δ, Ε· ἰσάκις ἄρα ὁ Δ τὸν Α same ratio as A and C have been taken [Prop. 7.33].
μετρεῖ καὶ ὁ Ε τὸν Γ. ὁσάκις δὴ ὁ Δ τὸν Α μετρεῖ, τοσαῦται Thus, D measures A as many times as E (measures) C
μονάδες ἔστωσαν ἐν τῷ Ζ· ὁ Ζ ἄρα τὸν Δ πολλαπλασιάσας [Prop. 7.20]. So as many times as D measures A, so
τὸν Α πεποίηκεν. ὥστε ὁ Α ἐπίπεδός ἐστιν, πλευραὶ δὲ many units let there be in F. Thus, F has made A (by)
αὐτοῦ οἱ Δ, Ζ. πάλιν, ἐπεὶ οἱ Δ, Ε ἐλάχιστοί εἰσι τῶν τὸν multiplying D [Def. 7.15]. Hence, A is plane, and D,
αὐτὸν λόγον ἐχόντων τοῖς Γ, Β, ἰσάκις ἄρα ὁ Δ τὸν Γ με- F (are) its sides. Again, since D and E are the least
τρεῖ καὶ ὁ Ε τὸν Β. ὁσάκις δὴ ὁ Ε τὸν Β μετρεῖ, τοσαῦται of those (numbers) having the same ratio as C and B,
μονάδες ἔστωσαν ἐν τῷ Η. ὁ Ε ἄρα τὸν Β μετρεῖ κατὰ τὰς D thus measures C as many times as E (measures) B
ἐν τῷ Η μονάδας· ὁ Η ἄρα τὸν Ε πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Β [Prop. 7.20]. So as many times as E measures B, so
πεποίηκεν. ὁ Β ἄρα ἐπίπεδος ἐστι, πλευραὶ δὲ αὐτοῦ εἰσιν many units let there be in G. Thus, E measures B acοἱ Ε, Η. οἱ Α, Β ἄρα ἐπίπεδοί εἰσιν ἀριθμοί. λέγω δή, ὅτι cording to the units in G. Thus, G has made B (by) mulκαὶ ὅμοιοι. ἐπεὶ γὰρ ὁ Ζ τὸν μὲν Δ πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν tiplying E [Def. 7.15]. Thus, B is plane, and E, G are
Α πεποίηκεν, τὸν δὲ Ε πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Γ πεποίηκεν, its sides. Thus, A and B are (both) plane numbers. So I
ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς ὁ Δ πρὸς τὸν Ε, οὕτως ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν Γ, say that (they are) also similar. For since F has made A
τουτέστιν ὁ Γ πρὸς τὸν Β. πάλιν, ἐπεὶ ὁ Ε ἑκάτερον τῶν Ζ, (by) multiplying D, and has made C (by) multiplying E,
Η πολλαπλασιάσας τοὺς Γ, Β πεποίηκεν, ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς ὁ Ζ thus as D is to E, so A (is) to C—that is to say, C to B
πρὸς τὸν Η, οὕτως ὁ Γ πρὸς τὸν Β. ὡς δὲ ὁ Γ πρὸς τὸν Β, [Prop. 7.17].† Again, since E has made C, B (by) multiοὕτως ὁ Δ πρὸς τὸν Ε· καὶ ὡς ἄρα ὁ Δ πρὸς τὸν Ε, οὕτως plying F, G, respectively, thus as F is to G, so C (is) to
ὁ Ζ πρὸς τὸν Η· καὶ ἐναλλὰξ ὡς ὁ Δ πρὸς τὸν Ζ, οὕτως ὁ B [Prop. 7.17]. And as C (is) to B, so D (is) to E. And
Ε πρὸς τὸν Η. οἱ Α, Β ἄρα ὅμοιοι ἐπίπεδοι ἀριθμοί εἰσιν· αἱ thus as D (is) to E, so F (is) to G. And, alternately, as D
γὰρ πλευραὶ αὐτῶν ἀνάλογόν εἰσιν· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. (is) to F, so E (is) to G [Prop. 7.13]. Thus, A and B are
similar plane numbers. For their sides are proportional
[Def. 7.21]. (Which is) the very thing it was required to
show.
† This part of the proof is defective, since it is not demonstrated that F × E = C. Furthermore, it is not necessary to show that D : E :: A : C,
because this is true by hypothesis.
kaþ. Proposition 21
᾿Εὰν δύο ἀριθμῶν δύο μέσοι ἀνάλογον ἐμπίπτωσιν If two numbers fall between two numbers in mean
ἀριθμοί, ὅμοιοι στερεοί εἰσιν οἱ ἀριθμοί. proportion then the (latter) are similar solid (numbers).
Δύο γὰρ ἀριθμῶν τῶν Α, Β δύο μέσοι ἀνάλογον For let the two numbers C and D fall between the two
ἐμπιπτέτωσαν ἀριθμοὶ οἱ Γ, Δ· λέγω, ὅτι οἱ Α, Β ὅμοιοι numbers A and B in mean proportion. I say that A and
στερεοί εἰσιν. B are similar solid (numbers).
Εἰλήφθωσαν γὰρ ἐλάχιστοι ἀριθμοὶ τῶν τὸν αὐτὸν For let the three least numbers E, F, G having the
λόγον ἐχόντων τοῖς Α, Γ, Δ τρεῖς οἱ Ε, Ζ, Η· οἱ ἄρα ἄκροι same ratio as A, C, D have been taken [Prop. 8.2]. Thus,
αὐτῶν οἱ Ε, Η πρῶτοι πρὸς ἀλλήλους εἰσίν. καὶ ἐπεὶ τῶν the outermost of them, E and G, are prime to one anΕ, Η εἷς μέσος ἀνάλογον ἐμπέπτωκεν ἀριθμὸς ὁ Ζ, οἱ Ε, other [Prop. 8.3]. And since one number, F, has fallen
Η ἄρα ἀριθμοὶ ὅμοιοι ἐπίπεδοί εἰσιν. ἔστωσαν οὖν τοῦ μὲν (between) E and G in mean proportion, E and G are
247
STOIQEIWN hþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 8
Ε πλευραὶ οἱ Θ, Κ, τοῦ δὲ Η οἱ Λ, Μ. φανερὸν ἄρα ἐστὶν thus similar plane numbers [Prop. 8.20]. Therefore, let
ἐκ τοῦ πρὸ τούτου, ὅτι οἱ Ε, Ζ, Η ἑξῆς εἰσιν ἀνάλογον ἔν H, K be the sides of E, and L, M (the sides) of G. Thus,
τε τῷ τοῦ Θ πρὸς τὸν Λ λόγῳ καὶ τῷ τοῦ Κ πρὸς τὸν Μ. it is clear from the (proposition) before this (one) that E,
καὶ ἐπεὶ οἱ Ε, Ζ, Η ἐλάχιστοί εἰσι τῶν τὸν αὐτὸν λόγον F, G are continuously proportional in the ratio of H to
ἐχόντων τοῖς Α, Γ, Δ, καί ἐστιν ἴσον τὸ πλῆθος τῶν Ε, L, and of K to M. And since E, F, G are the least (numΖ, Η τῷ πλήθει τῶν Α, Γ, Δ, δι᾿ ἴσου ἄρα ἐστὶν ὡς ὁ Ε bers) having the same ratio as A, C, D, and the multitude
πρὸς τὸν Η, οὕτως ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν Δ. οἱ δὲ Ε, Η πρῶτοι, οἱ of E, F, G is equal to the multitude of A, C, D, thus,
δὲ πρῶτοι καὶ ἐλάχιστοι, οἱ δὲ ἐλάχιστοι μετροῦσι τοὺς τὸν via equality, as E is to G, so A (is) to D [Prop. 7.14].
αὐτὸν λόγον ἔχοντας αὐτοῖς ἰσάκις ὅ τε μείζων τὸν μείζονα And E and G (are) prime (to one another), and prime
καὶ ὁ ἐλάσσων τὸν ἐλάσσονα, τουτέστιν ὅ τε ἡγούμενος (numbers) are also the least (of those numbers having
τὸν ἡγούμενον καὶ ὁ ἑπόμενος τὸν ἑπόμενον· ἰσάκις ἄρα the same ratio as them) [Prop. 7.21], and the least (numὁ Ε τὸν Α μετρεῖ καὶ ὁ Η τὸν Δ. ὁσάκις δὴ ὁ Ε τὸν Α bers) measure those (numbers) having the same ratio as
μετρεῖ, τοσαῦται μονάδες ἔστωσαν ἐν τῷ Ν. ὁ Ν ἄρα τὸν Ε them an equal number of times, the greater (measuring)
πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Α πεποίηκεν. ὁ δὲ Ε ἐστιν ὁ ἐκ τῶν the greater, and the lesser the lesser—that is to say, the
Θ, Κ· ὁ Ν ἄρα τὸν ἐκ τῶν Θ, Κ πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Α leading (measuring) the leading, and the following the
πεποίηκεν. στερεὸς ἄρα ἐστὶν ὁ Α, πλευραὶ δὲ αὐτοῦ εἰσιν following [Prop. 7.20]. Thus, E measures A the same
οἱ Θ, Κ, Ν. πάλιν, ἐπεὶ οἱ Ε, Ζ, Η ἐλάχιστοί εἰσι τῶν τὸν number of times as G (measures) D. So as many times as
αὐτὸν λόγον ἐχόντων τοῖς Γ, Δ, Β, ἰσάκις ἄρα ὁ Ε τὸν Γ E measures A, so many units let there be in N. Thus, N
μετρεῖ καὶ ὁ Η τὸν Β. ὁσάκις δὴ ὁ Ε τὸν Γ μετρεῖ, τοσαῦται has made A (by) multiplying E [Def. 7.15]. And E is the
μονάδες ἔστωσαν ἐν τῷ Ξ. ὁ Η ἄρα τὸν Β μετρεῖ κατὰ τὰς (number created) from (multiplying) H and K. Thus, N
ἐν τῷ Ξ μονάδας· ὁ Ξ ἄρα τὸν Η πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Β has made A (by) multiplying the (number created) from
πεποίηκεν. ὁ δὲ Η ἐστιν ὁ ἐκ τῶν Λ, Μ· ὁ Ξ ἄρα τὸν ἐκ (multiplying) H and K. Thus, A is solid, and its sides are
τῶν Λ, Μ πολλαπλασιάσας τὸν Β πεποίηκεν. στερεὸς ἄρα H, K, N. Again, since E, F, G are the least (numbers)
ἐστὶν ὁ Β, πλευραὶ δὲ αὐτοῦ εἰσιν οἱ Λ, Μ, Ξ· οἱ Α, Β ἄρα having the same ratio as C, D, B, thus E measures C the
στερεοί εἰσιν. same number of times as G (measures) B [Prop. 7.20].
So as many times as E measures C, so many units let
there be in O. Thus, G measures B according to the units
in O. Thus, O has made B (by) multiplying G. And
G is the (number created) from (multiplying) L and M.
Thus, O has made B (by) multiplying the (number created) from (multiplying) L and M. Thus, B is solid, and
its sides are L, M, O. Thus, A and B are (both) solid.
Ξ
Α
Γ
∆
Β
Ε
Ζ
Η
Θ
Κ
Ν
Λ
Μ
A H
C
D
B
E
F
G
L
M
O
N
K
Λέγω [δή], ὅτι καὶ ὅμοιοι. ἐπεὶ γὰρ οἱ Ν, Ξ τὸν Ε πολ- [So] I say that (they are) also similar. For since N, O
λαπλασιάσαντες τοὺς Α, Γ πεποιήκασιν, ἔστιν ἄρα ὡς ὁ Ν have made A, C (by) multiplying E, thus as N is to O, so
πρὸς τὸν Ξ, ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν Γ, τουτέστιν ὁ Ε πρὸς τὸν Ζ. A (is) to C—that is to say, E to F [Prop. 7.18]. But, as
ἀλλ᾿ ὡς ὁ Ε πρὸς τὸν Ζ, ὁ Θ πρὸς τὸν Λ καὶ ὁ Κ πρὸς τὸν E (is) to F, so H (is) to L, and K to M. And thus as H
Μ· καὶ ὡς ἄρα ὁ Θ πρὸς τὸν Λ, οὕτως ὁ Κ πρὸς τὸν Μ καὶ (is) to L, so K (is) to M, and N to O. And H, K, N are
ὁ Ν πρὸς τὸν Ξ. καί εἰσιν οἱ μὲν Θ, Κ, Ν πλευραὶ τοῦ Α, the sides of A, and L, M, O the sides of B. Thus, A and
248
STOIQEIWN hþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 8
οἱ δὲ Ξ, Λ, Μ πλευραὶ τοῦ Β. οἱ Α, Β ἄρα ἀριθμοὶ ὅμοιοι B are similar solid numbers [Def. 7.21]. (Which is) the
στερεοί εἰσιν· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. very thing it was required to show.
† The Greek text has “O, L, M”, which is obviously a mistake.
kbþ. Proposition 22
᾿Εὰν τρεῖς ἀριθμοὶ ἑξῆς ἀνάλογον ὦσιν, ὁ δὲ πρῶτος If three numbers are continuously proportional, and
τετράγωνος ᾖ, καὶ ὁ τρίτος τετράγωνος ἔσται. the first is square, then the third will also be square.
Γ
Α
Β
C
A
B
῎Εστωσαν τρεῖς ἀριθμοὶ ἑξῆς ἀνάλογον οἱ Α, Β, Γ, ὁ δὲ Let A, B, C be three continuously proportional numπρῶτος ὁ Α τετράγωνος ἔστω· λέγω, ὅτι καὶ ὁ τρίτος ὁ Γ bers, and let the first A be square. I say that the third C
τετράγωνός ἐστιν. is also square.
᾿Επεὶ γὰρ τῶν Α, Γ εἷς μέσος ἀνάλογόν ἐστιν ἀριθμὸς For since one number, B, is in mean proportion to
ὁ Β, οἱ Α, Γ ἄρα ὅμοιοι ἐπίπεδοί εἰσιν. τετράγωνος δὲ ὁ Α· A and C, A and C are thus similar plane (numbers)
τετράγωνος ἄρα καὶ ὁ Γ· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. [Prop. 8.20]. And A is square. Thus, C is also square
[Def. 7.21]. (Which is) the very thing it was required to
show.
kgþ. Proposition 23
᾿Εὰν τέσσαρες ἀριθμοὶ ἑξῆς ἀνάλογον ὦσιν, ὁ δὲ πρῶτος If four numbers are continuously proportional, and
κύβος ᾖ, καὶ ὁ τέταρτος κύβος ἔσται. the first is cube, then the fourth will also be cube.
∆
Α
Β
Γ
. A
B
C
D
῎Εστωσαν τέσσαρες ἀριθμοὶ ἑξῆς ἀνάλογον οἱ Α, Β, Γ, Let A, B, C, D be four continuously proportional
Δ, ὁ δὲ Α κύβος ἔστω· λέγω, ὅτι καὶ ὁ Δ κύβος ἐστίν. numbers, and let A be cube. I say that D is also cube.
᾿Επεὶ γὰρ τῶν Α, Δ δύο μέσοι ἀνάλογόν εἰσιν ἀριθμοὶ For since two numbers, B and C, are in mean proporοἱ Β, Γ, οἱ Α, Δ ἄρα ὅμοιοί εἰσι στερεοὶ ἀριθμοί. κύβος δὲ tion to A and D, A and D are thus similar solid numbers
ὁ Α· κύβος ἄρα καὶ ὁ Δ· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. [Prop. 8.21]. And A (is) cube. Thus, D (is) also cube
[Def. 7.21]. (Which is) the very thing it was required to
show.
kdþ. Proposition 24
᾿Εὰν δύο ἀριθμοὶ πρὸς ἀλλήλους λόγον ἔχωσιν, ὃν If two numbers have to one another the ratio which
τετράγωνος ἀριθμὸς πρὸς τετράγωνον ἀριθμόν, ὁ δὲ a square number (has) to a(nother) square number, and
πρῶτος τετράγωνος ᾖ, καὶ ὁ δεύτερος τετράγωνος ἔσται. the first is square, then the second will also be square.
∆
Α
Β
Γ
D
A
B
C
Δύο γὰρ ἀριθμοὶ οἱ Α, Β πρὸς ἀλλήλους λόγον For let two numbers, A and B, have to one another
249
STOIQEIWN hþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 8
ἐχέτωσαν, ὃν τετράγωνος ἀριθμὸς ὁ Γ πρὸς τετράγωνον the ratio which the square number C (has) to the square
ἀριθμὸν τὸν Δ, ὁ δὲ Α τετράγωνος ἔστω· λέγω, ὅτι καὶ ὁ number D. And let A be square. I say that B is also
Β τετράγωνός ἐστιν. square.
᾿Επεὶ γὰρ οἱ Γ, Δ τετράγωνοί εἰσιν, οἱ Γ, Δ ἄρα ὅμοιοι For since C and D are square, C and D are thus simἐπίπεδοί εἰσιν. τῶν Γ, Δ ἄρα εἷς μέσος ἀνάλογον ἐμπίπτει ilar plane (numbers). Thus, one number falls (between)
ἀριθμός. καί ἐστιν ὡς ὁ Γ πρὸς τὸν Δ, ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν Β· C and D in mean proportion [Prop. 8.18]. And as C is
καὶ τῶν Α, Β ἄρα εἷς μέσος ἀνάλογον ἐμπίπτει ἀριθμός. καί to D, (so) A (is) to B. Thus, one number also falls (beἐστιν ὁ Α τετράγωνος· καὶ ὁ Β ἄρα τετράγωνός ἐστιν· ὅπερ tween) A and B in mean proportion [Prop. 8.8]. And A
ἔδει δεῖξαι. is square. Thus, B is also square [Prop. 8.22]. (Which is)
the very thing it was required to show.
keþ. Proposition 25
᾿Εὰν δύο ἀριθμοὶ πρὸς ἀλλήλους λόγον ἔχωσιν, ὃν If two numbers have to one another the ratio which
κύβος ἀριθμὸς πρὸς κύβον ἀριθμόν, ὁ δὲ πρῶτος κύβος ᾖ, a cube number (has) to a(nother) cube number, and the
καὶ ὁ δεύτερος κύβος ἔσται. first is cube, then the second will also be cube.
∆
Α
Ε
Ζ
Β
Γ
D
A
E
F
B
C
Δύο γὰρ ἀριθμοὶ οἱ Α, Β πρὸς ἀλλήλους λόγον For let two numbers, A and B, have to one another
ἐχέτωσαν, ὃν κύβος ἀριθμὸς ὁ Γ πρὸς κύβον ἀριθμὸν τὸν the ratio which the cube number C (has) to the cube
Δ, κύβος δὲ ἔστω ὁ Α· λέγω [δή], ὅτι καὶ ὁ Β κύβος ἐστίν. number D. And let A be cube. [So] I say that B is also
᾿Επεὶ γὰρ οἱ Γ, Δ κύβοι εἰσίν, οἱ Γ, Δ ὅμοιοι στε- cube.
ρεοί εἰσιν· τῶν Γ, Δ ἄρα δύο μέσοι ἀνάλογον ἐμπίπτουσιν For since C and D are cube (numbers), C and D are
ἀριθμοί. ὅσοι δὲ εἰς τοὺς Γ, Δ μεταξὺ κατὰ τὸ συνεχὲς (thus) similar solid (numbers). Thus, two numbers fall
ἀνάλογον ἐμπίπτουσιν, τοσοῦτοι καὶ εἰς τοὺς τὸν αὐτὸν (between) C and D in mean proportion [Prop. 8.19].
λόγον ἔχοντας αὐτοῖς· ὥστε καὶ τῶν Α, Β δύο μέσοι And as many (numbers) as fall in between C and D in
ἀνάλογον ἐμπίπτουσιν ἀριθμοί. ἐμπιπτέτωσαν οἱ Ε, Ζ. ἐπεὶ continued proportion, so many also (fall) in (between)
οὖν τέσσαρες ἀριθμοὶ οἱ Α, Ε, Ζ, Β ἑξῆς ἀνάλογόν εἰσιν, those (numbers) having the same ratio as them (in conκαί ἐστι κύβος ὁ Α, κύβος ἄρα καὶ ὁ Β· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. tinued proportion) [Prop. 8.8]. And hence two numbers
fall (between) A and B in mean proportion. Let E and F
(so) fall. Therefore, since the four numbers A, E, F, B
are continuously proportional, and A is cube, B (is) thus
also cube [Prop. 8.23]. (Which is) the very thing it was
required to show.
kþ. Proposition 26
Οἱ ὅμοιοι ἐπίπεδοι ἀριθμοὶ πρὸς ἀλλήλους λόγον ἔχου- Similar plane numbers have to one another the ratio
σιν, ὃν τετράγωνος ἀριθμὸς πρὸς τετράγωνον ἀριθμόν. which (some) square number (has) to a(nother) square
number.
Α ∆
Γ
Β Ζ
Ε
F
A
C
B
D
E
῎Εστωσαν ὅμοιοι ἐπίπεδοι ἀριθμοὶ οἱ Α, Β· λέγω, ὅτι Let A and B be similar plane numbers. I say that A
ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν Β λόγον ἔχει, ὃν τετράγωνος ἀριθμὸς πρὸς has to B the ratio which (some) square number (has) to
250
STOIQEIWN hþ. ELEMENTS BOOK 8
τετράγωνον ἀριθμόν. a(nother) square number.
᾿Επεὶ γὰρ οἱ Α, Β ὅμοιοι ἐπίπεδοί εἰσιν, τῶν Α, Β ἄρα For since A and B are similar plane numbers, one
εἷς μέσος ἀνάλογον ἐμπίπτει ἀριθμός. ἐμπιπτέτω καὶ ἔστω ὁ number thus falls (between) A and B in mean proporΓ, καὶ εἰλήφθωσαν ἐλάχιστοι ἀριθμοὶ τῶν τὸν αὐτὸν λόγον tion [Prop. 8.18]. Let it (so) fall, and let it be C. And
ἐχόντων τοῖς Α, Γ, Β οἱ Δ, Ε, Ζ· οἱ ἄρα ἄκροι αὐτῶν οἱ let the least numbers, D, E, F, having the same ratio
Δ, Ζ τετράγωνοί εἰσιν. καὶ ἐπεί ἐστιν ὡς ὁ Δ πρὸς τὸν Ζ, as A, C, B have been taken [Prop. 8.2]. The outermost
οὕτως ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν Β, καί εἰσιν οἱ Δ, Ζ τετράγωνοι, ὁ Α of them, D and F, are thus square [Prop. 8.2 corr.]. And
ἄρα πρὸς τὸν Β λόγον ἔχει, ὃν τετράγωνος ἀριθμὸς πρὸς since as D is to F, so A (is) to B, and D and F are square,
τετράγωνον ἀριθμόν· ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. A thus has to B the ratio which (some) square number
(has) to a(nother) square number. (Which is) the very
thing it was required to show.
kzþ. Proposition 27
Οἱ ὅμοιοι στερεοὶ ἀριθμοὶ πρὸς ἀλλήλους λόγον ἔχου- Similar solid numbers have to one another the ratio
σιν, ὃν κύβος ἀριθμὸς πρὸς κύβον ἀριθμόν. which (some) cube number (has) to a(nother) cube number.
Θ
Α
Γ
∆
Β
Ε
Ζ
Η
H
A
C
D
B
E
F
G
῎Εστωσαν ὅμοιοι στερεοὶ ἀριθμοὶ οἱ Α, Β· λέγω, ὅτι ὁ Let A and B be similar solid numbers. I say that A
Α πρὸς τὸν Β λόγον ἔχει, ὃν κύβος ἀριθμὸς πρὸς κύβον has to B the ratio which (some) cube number (has) to
ἀριθμόν. a(nother) cube number.
᾿Επεὶ γὰρ οἱ Α, Β ὅμοιοι στερεοί εἰσιν, τῶν Α, Β ἄρα δύο For since A and B are similar solid (numbers), two
μέσοι ἀνάλογον ἐμπίπτουσιν ἀριθμοί. ἐμπιπτέτωσαν οἱ Γ, numbers thus fall (between) A and B in mean proportion
Δ, καὶ εἰλήφθωσαν ἐλάχιστοι ἀριθμοὶ τῶν τὸν αὐτὸν λόγον [Prop. 8.19]. Let C and D have (so) fallen. And let the
ἐχόντων τοῖς Α, Γ, Δ, Β ἴσοι αὐτοῖς τὸ πλῆθος οἱ Ε, Ζ, Η, least numbers, E, F, G, H, having the same ratio as A,
Θ· οἱ ἄρα ἄκροι αὐτῶν οἱ Ε, Θ κύβοι εἰσίν. καί ἐστιν ὡς ὁ C, D, B, (and) equal in multitude to them, have been
Ε πρὸς τὸν Θ, οὕτως ὁ Α πρὸς τὸν Β· καὶ ὁ Α ἄρα πρὸς taken [Prop. 8.2]. Thus, the outermost of them, E and
τὸν Β λόγον ἔχει, ὃν κύβος ἀριθμὸς πρὸς κύβον ἀριθμόν· H, are cube [Prop. 8.2 corr.]. And as E is to H, so A (is)
ὅπερ ἔδει δεῖξαι. to B. And thus A has to B the ratio which (some) cube
number (has) to a(nother) cube number. (Which is) the
very thing it was required to show.
251
252